<doc id="79820" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79820" title="PSV Eindhoven">
PSV Eindhoven

The Philips Sport Vereniging (, ), abbreviated as PSV and internationally known as PSV Eindhoven is a sports club from Eindhoven, Netherlands. It is best known for its professional football department, which plays in the Eredivisie, the Dutch football top division, since its inception in 1956 and, along with Ajax and Feyenoord, it is one of the country's "big three" clubs that have dominated that competition.
The club was founded in 1913 as a team for Philips employees. PSV’s history contains two golden eras revolving around the UEFA Cup victory in 1978 and the 1987–88 European Cup victory as part of the seasonal treble in 1988. The team has won the Eredivisie 22 times, the KNVB Cup nine times and the Johan Cruijff Schaal ten times. Currently, PSV is 28th on the UEFA club coefficients ranking.
Throughout the years, PSV established itself as a stepping stone for future world class players like Ruud Gullit, Ronald Koeman, Romário, Ronaldo, Phillip Cocu, Jaap Stam, Ruud van Nistelrooy and Arjen Robben.
Since its foundation, it has played in the Philips Stadion and has upheld its club colours (red and white). Its elaborate connection with Philips can be witnessed in its sponsoring, shared technology and board member ties. Fans have named themselves 'boeren' (, Dutch for either peasants or farmers), taking pride in Eindhoven's status of being a provincial city and their Brabantian heritage.
History.
Foundation and first decades (1913–1962).
To serve the need for activities with Philips employees, the company founded its own football team in 1910: the Philips Elftal. Its ground was the Philips Sportpark, located on the same location as the present day stadium. Financial turmoil and worker strikes led to a quick demise of the team and in 1913, its successor emerged, Philips Sport Vereniging, founded on 31 August. It was the day that Philips organized celebrations and sports competitions in light of the centennial defeat of the French in the Napoleonic Wars. It was not until 1916, however, that the football department switched its name from Philips Elftal to PSV. Because of World War I, the first possibility to enter a league was in the 1915–16 season. The club's first ever match was a 3–2 defeat against Willem II Reserves on 19 September 1915. The team did achieve promotion that season to a newly created Third Division of the Brabantian FA. Under the guidance of coach Wout Buitenweg, PSV were promoted in 1918 and 1921 as well, eventually reaching the Eerste Klasse. The team was relegated in 1925, but its stint in the Second Division only lasted one year when PSV were promoted again. Since 1926, PSV has always played in the highest possible domestic league.
That year, defender Sjef van Run was brought in and a year later Jan van den Broek joined PSV, two players that would shape the squad in the coming years. Behind the scenes, Frans Otten became chairman of the entire PSV sports union. He was responsible for bringing the club to a new level with new accommodations and stadium expansions. After winning the district league in 1929, PSV entered the championship play-offs. In that competition, it won 6 out of 8 matches. A 5–1 win against Velocitas from the city of Groningen meant that PSV was crowned league champions for the first time. In the following three years, PSV won the district league every year, but it could not win the play-offs until 1935. In that year, the team secured the second championship ever in a 2–1 victory against DWS.
Due to World War II, attendances decreased significantly and in 1940, PSV player Johan Brusselers died in combat. After the war, PSV signed two new strikers: Piet Fransen in 1948 and Coen Dillen in 1949. In 1950, PSV got its first post-war success when the team defeated HFC Haarlem in the KNVB Cup final; the match ended in 4–3 after extra-time. A year later, PSV won the district title after EVV failed to win their final match. Even though coach Sam Wadsworth resigned during the championship play-offs, the title was won after a 2–1 win over Willem II. The 1950–51 season was Dillen’s breakthrough, scoring 21 times and earning the nickname "The Canon". Besides Dillen and Fransen, a memorable player of the early 1950s success was goalkeeper Lieuwe Steiger, who ended up playing 383 matches for PSV.
In 1955, PSV became the first Dutch club to enter the European Champion Clubs' Cup. The two matches against Rapid Wien ended in 1–6 and 1–0. Other success in the fifties remained absent but in the 1956–57 season, Dillen scored 43 times – a Dutch record that still stands today. The approaching 1960s marked a shift in player’s heritage; the team went from mostly Brabantian men to players nationwide. Representative for this policy were defender Roel Wiersma, who arrived in 1954 and captained the team for a decade, and Piet van der Kuil, who came from Ajax for 59,000 euro (PSV's then-highest transfer fee). Dillen left the club in 1961 after being club top scorer every year from 1953 to 1960. In 1962, Otten also decided to quit as chairman of the sports union. By then, board member Ben van Gelder had gradually started to mold the club in his way. Throughout the next two decades, he became responsible for turning PSV into a full-fledged professional organization.
Van der Kuijlen era and UEFA Cup victory (1963–1978).
In the 1962–63 season, marking PSV's 50-year anniversary, the club appointed Bram Appel as the new coach. The first results were disastrous, however, with a mere six points earned from the first six fixtures. A sudden revival led to a first place at the winter break and a 5–2 victory over Ajax in June meant that PSV could celebrate its fourth league title, with Pierre Kerkhofs leading the goal scorer charts with 22 goals. The following year, PSV ended second in the league but more significantly, reached the Europa Cup I quarter-finals for the first time, where it was eliminated by FC Zürich. Appel remained coach for five years; the position was later on followed up with short stints by Milan Nikolić and Wim Blokland. Willy van der Kuijlen was signed in 1964, who produced 23 league goals in 1966 and became the league’s top scorer at age 20.
Between 1968 and 1972, Kurt Linder coached PSV. His team reached two Dutch cup finals and the semi-finals of the European Cup Winners' Cup. Van der Kuijlen had trouble fulfilling his promise after an encouraging career start in the 1960s, however, partly because of a lack of chemistry between him and Linder’s harsh coaching style. The early 1970s in football were dominated by Ajax and Feyenoord and it was not until the appointment of Kees Rijvers as coach in 1972 that would mark the start of increasing success for PSV. With Van der Kuijlen and goalkeeper Jan van Beveren as the stars of the team, Rijvers created a new squad by signing Ralf Edström, Gerrie Deijkers and the twins Willy and René van der Kerkhof. Things improved for Van der Kuijlen when Rijvers built the team around him, giving him a free role in the process. Van der Kuijlen, a technical player, formed a successful striker partnership with Edström, who was famed for his heading ability. It led to a Dutch cup victory in 1974, and after a blistering season start (no defeats in the first season half) and 28 goals by Van der Kuijlen. PSV also won the league for the fifth time in 1975.
A year later, PSV managed to win its first double. With defender Huub Stevens joining the team, the league title was secured after a 4–1 result against Feyenoord. Earlier, a 1–0 victory over Roda JC meant that PSV won the national cup as well. In the European Cup, the final was only narrowly missed after a 1–0 aggregate loss against Saint-Étienne in the semi-finals. After the two consecutive titles, PSV ended second in 1977. The following year, Edström left the squad but PSV nonetheless enjoyed a strong league campaign. In April 1978, the team secured the title without a single loss. The domestic cup ended early after a shocking 1–6 first round loss against FC Wageningen (PSV’s biggest home loss ever to date). The UEFA Cup campaign proved to be more successful; after wins against Glenavon, Widzew Łódź, Eintracht Braunschweig and 1. FC Magdeburg, the team faced Barcelona. A 3–0 win in the first leg was nullified by the Catalans in the return leg, but a single goal by Nick Deacy at Camp Nou meant that PSV could progress with a 4–3 aggregate win. The two-legged final against Bastia first produced a goalless draw in the first match. The return leg in Eindhoven ended in a 3–0 win, with goals by Willy van de Kerkhof, Deijkers and Van der Kuijlen providing PSV its first European trophy.
Hiddink and the European Cup victory (1979–1989).
After the UEFA Cup victory, the team chemistry started to suffer, which was reflected in the results. Not long after a 6–0 UEFA Cup loss against Saint-Étienne, Rijvers was sacked and the squad disintegrated. Van Beveren, unhappy with the declining success and Rijvers' departure, left for the United States after 291 league games and years of captaincy. Van Gelder also quit in 1980 and was replaced by Kees Ploegsma. Even though PSV invested in players like Hallvar Thoresen and Jurrie Koolhof, success remained absent. Thijs Libregts' (coach from 1980 until 1983) highest league position was the second place and in 1983, Jan Reker took over. A clash between Van der Kuijlen and Libregts led to the former’s departure in 1982 after nearly 18 seasons at the club.
In 1985, chairman Jacques Ruts and Ploegsma decided on a change of direction: Hans Kraay became the new director of football (supervising Reker in 1985–86, and taking over altogether in 1986–87) and PSV started to sign players with flair, like Ruud Gullit, Søren Lerby, Gerald Vanenburg and Eric Gerets. Gullit, who quickly was appointed as captain, contributed to the team that headed the league table for the majority of the 1985–86 Eredivisie and claimed the title after an 8–2 win against Go Ahead Eagles. Being unhappy with his personal development, Gullit heavily criticized PSV and Kraay in a March 1987 interview. The management's subsequent warning was deemed too lenient by Kraay, who resigned. Gullit's strained relationship with the club meant that he left for Milan in the summer for a world record fee of €7.7 million. Earlier that year, Guus Hiddink replaced Kraay and Ronald Koeman joined PSV. That season, the squad suffered early eliminations from the Dutch cup and European Cup, but secured the title in the penultimate match.
The 1987–88 season turned out to be PSV's best year in history. The Eredivisie was won four matches before the end after many high scoring matches, leading up to 117 goals. The cup was also won after beating Roda JC 3–2 after extra time. The European Cup campaign started with wins against Fenerbahçe and Rapid Wien. Subsequently, PSV managed to reach the final with only draws. The quarter finals against Bordeaux were decided by Wim Kieft’s away goal. A vicious foul by Hans Gillhaus on Jean Tigana was praised by Koeman, which prompted UEFA to suspend him for the semi-final return leg against Real Madrid. Again, an away goal in the first leg (a notoriously lethargic shot by Edward Linskens at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium) meant that the second leg’s 0–0 was enough to proceed. The final against Benfica, held in Stuttgart, remained goalless. In the penalty shoot-out, Van Breukelen saved Benfica’s sixth penalty by António Veloso, which meant that PSV had won the European Cup and completed the treble.
After the summer break, Willy van de Kerkhof, present at both the 1978 and 1988 triumphs, was honored with a farewell match. The 1988–89 season again resulted in the double: Hiddink’s squad won the title (albeit with less dominance than the year before) and PSV beat Groningen in the cup final. In comparison, the international competitions were disappointing. The Intercontinental Cup against Nacional ended in a 2–2 draw, but PSV lost the penalty shoot-out with 7–6. The team was also beaten in the UEFA Super Cup by Mechelen (3–1 on aggregate). In the European Cup, Real Madrid got its revenge by eliminating PSV in the quarter-finals.
Developing talent (1989–1999).
After the European Cup win, PSV outsmarted many clubs by signing Romário. After a first season with 19 league goals, his hat-trick in the November 1989 match against Steaua București (5–1) – including a memorable solo effort – was his big breakthrough. In 1989, after Koeman left, PSV ended second in the league, but won the KNVB Cup after defeating Vitesse (1–0). Hiddink left the team in 1990, to be replaced by Bobby Robson. In his two seasons at the club, PSV won two league titles; the first one on goal difference (with Ajax) and the second one in the penultimate match against Groningen. Meanwhile, Romário – league top scorer in 1989, 1990 and 1991 – was admired by fans, but sometimes also renounced by the squad for being unprofessional and selfish. Robson had frequent clashes with Romário, but the striker never changed his ways. These events, in addition to the lack of European success, meant that Robson was let go in 1992. While Gerets retired, Hans Westerhof took over as coach, but only won the Super Cup in his single season at the helm. In 1993, Romário was transferred to Barcelona. Westerhof was replaced by Aad de Mos, who led the team to the third place.
Early in the 1994–95 season, De Mos was fired and replaced by Dick Advocaat (after Kees Rijvers temporarily took over). PSV saw Van Breukelen retiring and signed Luc Nilis in 1994, who formed a powerful duo with another signing, the 17-year-old Ronaldo. The Brazilian striker scored 30 goals in his debut season, while Nilis was named Dutch Footballer of the Year in an otherwise trophy-less year. After an injury-filled 1995–96 season where he still managed 12 goals, Ronaldo left for Barcelona. That season, PSV won the cup after a 5–2 win against Sparta Rotterdam. In the 1996–97 season, when Harry van Raaij became chairman, Advocaat had created a team with players like Phillip Cocu, Jaap Stam, Boudewijn Zenden and Wim Jonk. It led to the Eredivisie title, with Nilis becoming league top goalscorer (21 goals). In the 1997–98 season, the team came in second behind Ajax in both league and cup. It resulted in Cocu, Stam, Zenden, Jonk and Advocaat leaving PSV, forcing the club to build a new squad. Robson temporarily returned in 1998 for one year so that desired coach Eric Gerets could get his coaching badges. Again, Nilis showed to be highly compatible with a poacher-type striker; new signing Ruud van Nistelrooy scored 31 times in his first season. In the season's last round, PSV beat Utrecht 3–2 with a last-minute goal by Arnold Bruggink – just enough for Champions League qualification.
Dutch hegemony (2000–2008).
In the 1999–2000 season, Van Nistelrooy had scored 29 goals after just 23 matches, but after two serious injuries, an imminent transfer to Manchester United was forced to be postponed for a year. PSV were comfortably crowned league champions in Gerets' debut year, creating a 16-point gap with runner-up Heerenveen. The 2000–01 Eredivisie was also won with new striker Mateja Kežman, who replaced Van Nistelrooy and the departed Nilis. The cup final was lost to Twente after penalties. In the UEFA Cup, PSV faced 1. FC Kaiserslautern at home; fans threatening to storm the field during the match prompted Gerets and some players to personally intervene. PSV was fined by UEFA and forced to play a European match on neutral ground. After Van Nistelrooy left, PSV ended second in the 2001–02 season and were eliminated in the UEFA Cup quarter-finals by Feyenoord.
Gerets was released and Guus Hiddink returned to the club as coach and director of football, with Arjen Robben, Park Ji-sung, Lee Young-pyo joining PSV. Their first season immediately brought a league title, secured in the last match against Groningen. But in the 2003–04 season, PSV failed to reclaim the championship. In 2004, the PSV board clashed with Hiddink and Van Raaij concerning the expenditures. Van Raaij left in September and Hiddink never got along with his successor Rob Westerhof, who sided with the board. Even though Kežman and Robben left in 2004, Hiddink had gradually built a powerful squad, with Heurelho Gomes, Alex, Park, Lee, Mark van Bommel and the returning Phillip Cocu. The Eredivisie was won five matches before the end, and Willem II was beaten in the cup final. After eight consecutive Champions League group stage eliminations, PSV reached the knockout stage. There, they beat Monaco 3–0 on aggregate and Lyon after penalties. The first semi-final against Milan was lost 2–0. In the return, PSV took a 2–0 lead but a late goal by Massimo Ambrosini ended the hope to reach the final, despite an injury-time third goal by Cocu.
After the 2004–05 season, Van Bommel, Vogel, Park and Lee left. With new signing Timmy Simons and youth prospect Ibrahim Afellay, PSV reached the Champions League knockout stage again. In that round, Lyon revenged PSV by winning 5–0 on aggregate. The team did win the league, but lost the cup final to Ajax. Afterwards, Hiddink left and Ronald Koeman replaced him. Westerhof, who lost support from the board, resigned soon after Hiddink’s departure. Jan Reker became general manager. During the 2006–07 season, league leaders PSV squandered a 12-point lead, enabling AZ and Ajax to equal their 72 points before the last round. A surprise AZ defeat in the last fixture meant that PSV’s 5–1 victory against Vitesse was enough to edge the title win; PSV had a single goal difference with Ajax. Koeman was criticised by the board after losing a big lead, but was eventually allowed to remain as coach. In the 2007–08 season, after Cocu and Alex left, the team was disqualified from the KNVB Cup after fielding a suspended Manuel da Costa. In October, Koeman took up the coaching job at Valencia, prompting PSV to first appoint Jan Wouters and then Sef Vergoossen as caretakers. The fourth title in a row was won in the last match, again against Vitesse. After the title, Heurelho Gomes and director of football Stan Valckx voiced criticism towards Reker, forcing the club to choose between Reker and Gomes. Subsequently, Reker sacked Valckx and sold Gomes to Tottenham Hotspur.
Recent years (2008–present).
Huub Stevens returned as coach in 2008, but disappointing performances and clashes between Stevens and the squad resulted in his resignation six months later. Caretaker Dwight Lodeweges wrapped up the season with a fourth place. The following year, Fred Rutten was appointed as coach. In his first two seasons, PSV reached the third place twice. With Rutten as coach, PSV beat Feyenoord 10–0 in a home game on 24 October 2010, a historical win and Feyenoord's heaviest defeat in their club history. Meanwhile, the club experienced liquidity problems, but secured its future through loans and property sales. Key players Ibrahim Afellay and Balázs Dzsudzsák were sold and as a consequence, director of football Marcel Brands spent €25 million to improve the squad. But in the 2011–12 season, the team dropped out of the title race early again, which led to Rutten's dismissal. Phillip Cocu finished the season as caretaker, leading the team to a third place and a KNVB Cup after beating Heracles Almelo. For the 2012–13 season, Dick Advocaat returned as head coach, while Mark van Bommel returned from Milan. Despite 103 league goals, the team ended as runner-up in both Eredivisie and KNVB Cup. Advocaat, who struggled with the job's intensity, left after one season. In 2013, Cocu was appointed as head coach. On 18 April 2015, PSV won the Eredivisie after a 4–1 win over Heerenveen. This was their first league title since 2008, and it ended a four-year domination of the league by Ajax. On 8 December 2015, PSV reached the knock-out stages of the Champions League, becoming the first Dutch club to do so since the 2006–07 Champions League season.
Crest and colors.
PSV's first crest consisted of a light bulb and the words "Philips Sport" in a circular shape. Its next incarnation was a shield-shaped logo with red-and-white vertical lines, topped off with the letters "PSV". The third design of the crest proved to be a durable one; its oval shape, red-and-white horizontal lines and a flag with the PSV letters incorporated remains used until today. Only minor changes have occurred: the border color and addition of horseshoe-shaped figures, a circle around the three letters and the addition of two stars to commemorate winning twenty league titles. Early incarnations of the oval version also included dots for the abbreviation "P.S.V.". For the centennial celebrations in 2013, a laurel wreath and the number "100" in gold were temporarily added to the crest.
The colors red and white were chosen at the founding meeting in 1913 by Jan Willem Hofkes, the first chairman of the club. He apparently appreciated the contrast between his red raspberry drink and his white notepad. Inspired by the club colors, the first kit consisted of a red-and-white vertically striped shirt, black shorts and red-and-white horizontally striped socks. This combination was worn until the 1970s, when the club switched to a completely red shirt, which was worn with either white or black shorts. The red kit was changed back to a striped version in 1989. The red-and-white stripes have remained ever since, albeit in very varied adaptations. The shorts would also often change between black and white. During Ruud Gullit's tenure at PSV, he personally changed the shorts from black to white, in an attempt to improve the stature of the kit. For the centennial celebrations in 2013, PSV have temporarily switched to an all-red jersey with white shorts and socks. Its design choices were meant to reminisce the kits worn during the 1987–88 season.
Because of the close ties with Philips, PSV have had the same jersey sponsor without exception since 1982, the year jersey sponsorships were introduced in the Eredivisie. This is a record in Dutch football. Starting in the 2016–17 season, however, Philips will no longer be the main shirt sponsor. PSV's first clothing sponsor was Le Coq Sportif, from 1970 to 1974, when it switched to Adidas. They remained sponsor until 1995, when they were replaced by Nike, until Umbro became the shirt sponsor in 2015, ending a 20-year relationship between PSV and Nike.
Stadium & training facilities.
PSV have played at the Philips Stadion since its foundation in 1913, when it was still named Philips Sportpark. The venue was built in the Strijp borough, and more specifically in the Philipsdorp area – a neighborhood set up in 1910 by Anton Philips in order to provide accommodation to employees. A football field was simultaneously laid out where PSV’s predecessor, the Philips Elftal, played its first match in on 15 January 1911 against Hollandia from Woensel. In 1916, the first wooden stand was built, providing seating space for 550 viewers. Another stand with 900 seats was built in the 1930s. In 1941, a running track was added, but it was removed 17 years later. During World War II, the stadium was damaged by the war; the reparations took place after the liberation of South Netherlands in 1944.
Four 40-meter high floodlights were installed in the stadium in 1958, making evening matches possible. The lights were inaugurated with an exhibition match against Anderlecht. In 1977, the main stand was completely rebuilt, but an alkali–silica reaction ten years later caused the concrete to crack. Chairman Jacques Ruts, who was previously introduced to the skybox in the United States, considered a new stand to be an opportunity to attract more sponsors. The new main stand – two tiers, with skyboxes in the middle – was introduced in a friendly match against Milan in 1988. In the nineties, the other three stands are also elevated. The last major renovation was the closing of the four open corners of the stadium. Along with creating more seats, the new corners had window blind-type constructions, which allowed air to flow through in order to let the grass breath. The completion was celebrated in October 2002, with the capacity increased to 35,000. In the summer of 2005, the club removed the tall fences around the pitch, replacing them with lower railings keeping the spectators off the grass. Unauthorized persons who do invade the pitch will receive a €15,000 penalty and a ten-year-ban from visiting the ground.
The Philips Stadion has been awarded four out of five stars by the UEFA Stadium Rankings. The ground hold several designated areas. The lower terraces on the East stand are considered the proper location for the fanatic viewers. There are also separate areas for youngsters up to 16 years old, for the disabled and for fans of the visiting team in the north-west upper corner. A stand named the "Family Corner" specifically serves children up to 12 and their parents. For business representatives, the stadium has business rooms and suites, totaling 1186 seats. Besides football-related activities, the stadium holds merchandising stores, offices and three restaurants, including the Michelin-star assigned Avant-Garde. For the centennial celebrations, a PSV Museum will be revealed in the stadium. Training sessions by PSV are conducted on De Herdgang, located in the outskirts of Eindhoven in woodland surroundings. With ten fields and fitness facilities, it also accommodates all PSV youth and amateur teams. Its last major renovation occurred in 2006.
Support and rivalries.
PSV have attracted around 33,000 people to Eredivisie matches on average in the last years. The record attendance stands at 35,200, achieved in a match against Feyenoord at 17 November 2002. The club always reserves tickets for away fans and individual ticket purchases; the maximum number of season ticket holders therefore is 29,200. All season tickets were sold out in 2007 and 2008. More recently in 2013, PSV sold 28,000 season tickets. Research showed that over 25,000 season ticket holders hail from Noord-Brabant, with other significant groups coming from Limburg, Gelderland, Zuid-Holland, Noord-Holland and Belgium.
PSV currently has two independent fan bodies. The Supportersvereniging PSV was founded in 1920 and currently consists of 14,000 members. They own a fan base within the Philips Stadion. The second one, PSV Fans United, serve a more specific purpose: to improve the atmosphere in the stadium. Besides the fan unions, there are several sets of fans who work together on tifo choreography, like Lighttown Madness among others. The PSV Junior Club was founded by PSV in 1998 for children up to 12 years. Later it was renamed Phoxy Club after Phoxy, PSV's mascot. Currently, more than 20,000 children are member. Every year, the Phoxy Club Day is organized, offering activities for members who are joined by the first team squad. During pre-season, PSV also holds an Open Day for people of all ages; the event gives the opportunity for sponsors and new player signings to be presented. The official club anthem was composed by Kees van der Weijden and Jo Vermeulen. It was introduced in 1950 and is currently sung at every home match at 19 minutes and 13 seconds into the game – the time mirroring the club's foundation year.
PSV's main rivalry is with Ajax, with both teams regularly competing for the league title in the last forty years. The PSV fans, whose club has reserved the kit number "12" for them, refer to themselves as "boeren" (peasants); the word can be heard chanted through the home ground after every PSV goal. Its reference designates taking pride in their Brabantian heritage, as opposed to the metropolitan Amsterdam area. The Brabantian identity also plays a fundamental role in the club's culture with the Flag of North Brabant being incorporated in shirt design and being displayed in and around the stadium. PSV used to have an ongoing rivalry with FC Eindhoven, which originated in the 1910s. FC Eindhoven, being the older team, manifested itself as the "people’s club", whereas PSV was only open to Philips employees. In the 1940s and 1950s, PSV and FC Eindhoven were both competing for the league title, which increased the feud and divided the City of Light in "red-white striped" and "blue-white striped". Fixtures between the two sides were named the "Lichtstadderby" ("City of Light Derby"). After FC Eindhoven’s decline in the 1970s, the rivalry disappeared. Nowadays, relations between the two sets of supporters are generally friendly; during the annual pre-season derby supporters even sit in the same end without any major incidents. Although a friendly rivalry still exists, it is mostly felt on the FC Eindhoven side. However, it is not uncommon for people in Eindhoven to go to FC Eindhoven on Fridays (the usual matchday in the Eerste Divisie) and to go to PSV on a Saturday or Sunday. In recent times, FC Eindhoven was PSV's feeder club on several occasions and the clubs share a women's team and youth setup.
Organization and finances.
PSV was an association ("vereniging") until 1999, when it became a public limited company with shareholders ("naamloze vennootschap"). It meant that the club installed a board of directors, who are not involved in most of the decision-making processes. Instead, they serve as an advising and supervising entity. All shares but one are owned by a foundation, the Foundation PSV Football. The remaining share is owned by the Eindhoven Football Club PSV, another separate entity. The general manager holds responsibility for all activities regarding the club, and is supported by a manager operations and a treasurer. PSV also appoints a director of football, who manages football-related processes such as transfers (in conjunction with the technical staff), in order to control the long-term planning.
PSV was founded by Philips and in the first decades, the club was only open to employees. The club did sign players from elsewhere, however; one of the perks of playing for PSV was that players who were offered a football contract were always offered a Philips job as well. Philips has been kit sponsor since 1982 and the PSV home ground has included the Philips name since its foundation. The company pays €7.5 million per year for the sponsoring and will remain kit sponsor until 2016. Frits Philips, chairman of the company between 1961 and 1971, became an icon for PSV during his lifetime. At five years of age, he conducted the ceremonial kick-off at the first Philips Elftal match in 1911. Frits Philips would become intertwined with PSV and Eindhoven; his 100th birthday was widely celebrated in the city. Frits Philips had his own spot in the stands until his death and would sometimes provide pep talks to the squad during half-time. PSV was often a way for Philips to introduce its technology to the public. In 1950, a match between PSV and FC Eindhoven was the first televised match in the Netherlands, with Philips supplying the technique. And in 1958, Philips installed four floodlights in the stadium.
PSV's budget in 2011 was €60 million. Before 2011, PSV's budget would only remain balanced if the team would qualify for the UEFA Champions League every year. But disappointing performances since 2008 meant that the club ended up with a yearly €10–20 million negative balance, forcing the club to cut costs and obtain new revenues. The ground under the stadium and the training facilities were sold for €48.4 million to the Eindhoven municipality in a leasehold estate construction. PSV also took out a €20 million loan with Philips and additional loans with local entrepreneurs. The club also introduced sponsoring on the back of the player kits. Freo, part of De Lage Landen, was the company to present its name there.
On 21 April 2016, it was announced that Dutch energy company energiedirect.nl will replace Philips as PSV's kit sponsor, starting from the 2016–17 season. The company signed a contract for three seasons and will pay €6 million per year. Philips will continue to be a sponsor, but will decrease their contribution to €3 million per year.
Statistics and records.
PSV's 22 league championships are the second-highest in Dutch football, behind Ajax (33). The nine KNVB Cup victories are the third-highest, after Ajax (18) and Feyenoord (11). PSV won the most Johan Cruijff Shield's so far, with nine. The double was achieved four times, with the one in 1988 being part of the treble, a feat only achieved by six other European clubs. Between 1985 and 1989, and between 2005 and 2008, PSV won the Eredivisie four times in a row; the only other club accomplishing this (once) was HVV Den Haag. In recent decades, the team has been consistently competing for the top spots in the league: in the Eredivisie all-time standings (since 1956), PSV are second behind Ajax. PSV have played in a European competition every year since 1974; only Barcelona (since 1959) and Anderlecht (since 1964) have a longer streak in play.
Willy van der Kuijlen currently holds the record for the most league appearances and the most league goals. He played 528 matches and scored 308 goals between 1964 and 1981. Willy van de Kerkhof played the second-highest amount of league matches for PSV; he appeared in 418 Eredivisie fixtures. The third-highest in the list is Jan Heintze with 395 games. The second-highest goalscorer for PSV is Coen Dillen, who produced 288 goals. Third in the list is Piet Fransen with 210 goals. The record for number of goals in one season stands at 43, scored by Dillen in the 1956–57 season; this figure is also a national record. Another domestic record is the amount of consecutive minutes with a clean sheet. The number stands at 1,159 minutes, which PSV achieved in 2004 with two different goalkeepers: Heurelho Gomes and Edwin Zoetebier. The largest transfer fee PSV have ever received was for Ruud van Nistelrooy; Manchester United paid €30 million for the striker in 2001. Mateja Kežman's move to PSV in 2000 was the most expensive incoming transfer; €11.3 million was paid to Partizan.
In 2010, PSV made international headlines when they humiliated former European champions Feyenoord 10–0.
Honours.
Domestic results.
Below is a table with PSV's domestic results since the introduction of the Eredivisie in 1956.
Current squad.
"For recent transfers, see List of Dutch football transfers summer 2015"
Retired numbers.
12 – Club Supporters (the 12th Man)
99 – Phoxy (Mascot)
Former managers.
"As of 27 June 2013."

</doc>
<doc id="79821" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79821" title="The Kindly Ones">
The Kindly Ones

The Kindly Ones may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79823" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79823" title="Real mode">
Real mode

Real mode, also called real address mode, is an operating mode of all x86-compatible CPUs. Real mode is characterized by a 20-bit segmented memory address space (giving exactly 1 MiB of addressable memory) and unlimited direct software access to all addressable memory, I/O addresses and peripheral hardware. Real mode provides no support for memory protection, multitasking, or code privilege levels. Before the release of the 80286, which introduced protected mode, real mode was the only available mode for x86 CPUs. In the interests of backwards compatibility, all x86 CPUs start in real mode when reset, though it is possible to emulate real mode on other systems when starting on other modes.
History.
The 286 architecture introduced protected mode, allowing for (among other things) hardware-level memory protection. Using these new features, however, required a new operating system that was specifically designed for protected mode. Since a primary design specification of x86 microprocessors is that they are fully backwards compatible with software written for all x86 chips before them, the 286 chip was made to start in 'real mode' – that is, in a mode which turned off the new memory protection features, so that it could run operating systems written for the 8086 and the 80186. As of 2016, even the newest x86 CPUs (including x86-64 CPUs) start in real mode at power-on and can run software written for almost any previous x86 chip.
The PC BIOS which IBM introduced operates in real mode, as do the DOS operating systems (MS-DOS, DR-DOS, etc.). Early versions of Microsoft Windows ran in real mode. Windows 386 made it possible to make some use of protected mode, and this was more fully realized in Windows 3.0, which could run in either real mode or make use of protected mode in the manner of Windows 386. Windows 3.0 actually had several modes: "real mode", "standard mode" and "386-enhanced mode", the latter required some of the virtualization features of the 80386 processor, and thus would not run on an 80286. Windows 3.1 removed support for real mode, and it was the first mainstream operating environment which required at least an 80286 processor. Windows 95 architecture is an evolution of Windows for Workgroups' "386 enhanced mode". None of these versions could be considered a modern x86 operating system, since they switched to protected mode only for certain functions. (Unix, Linux, OS/2, Windows NT 3.x and later, etc.) are considered "modern" OS's as they switch the CPU into protected mode at startup, never return to real mode and provide all of the benefits of protected mode all of the time, 64-bit operating systems use this only as another stepping stone to get to long mode. It is worth noting that the protected mode of the 80286 is considerably more primitive than the improved protected mode introduced with the 80386; the latter is sometimes called 386 protected mode, and is the mode modern 32-bit x86 operating systems run in.
Addressing capacity.
The 8086, 8088, and 80186 have a 20-bit address bus, but the unusual segmented addressing scheme Intel chose for these processors actually produces effective addresses which can have 21 significant bits. This scheme shifts a 16-bit segment number left four bits (making a 20-bit number with four least-significant zeros) before adding to it a 16-bit address offset; the maximum sum occurs when both the segment and offset are 0xFFFF, yielding 0xFFFF0 + 0xFFFF = 0x10FFEF. On the 8086, 8088, and 80186, the result of an effective address that overflows 20 bits is that the address "wraps around" to the zero end of the address range, i.e. it is taken modulo 2^20 (2^20 = 1048576 = 0x100000). However, the 80286 has 24 address bits and computes effective addresses to 24 bits even in real mode. Therefore, for the segment 0xFFFF and offset greater than 0x000F, the 80286 would actually make an access into the beginning of the second mebibyte of memory, whereas the 80186 and earlier would access an address equal to -0x10, which is at the beginning of the first mebibyte. (Note that on the 80186 and earlier, the first kibibyte of the address space, starting at address 0, is the permanent, immovable location of the interrupt vector table.) So, the actual amount of memory addressable by the 80286 and later x86 CPUs in real mode is 1 MiB + 64 KiB – 16 B = 1114096 B.
A20 line.
Some programs predating the 80286 were designed to take advantage of the wrap-around (modulo) memory addressing behavior, so the 80286 presented a problem for backward compatibility. Forcing the 21st address line (the actual logic signal wire coming out of the chip) to a logic low, representing a zero, results in a modulo-2^20 effect to match the earlier processors' address arithmetic, but the 80286 has no internal capability to perform this function. When IBM used the 80286 in their IBM Personal Computer AT, they solved this problem by including a software-settable gate to enable or disable (force to zero) the A20 address line, between the A20 pin on the 80286 and the system bus; this is known as Gate-A20 (the A20 gate), and it is still implemented in PC chipsets to this day. Most versions of the HIMEM.SYS extended memory driver for IBM-/MS-DOS famously displayed upon loading a message that they had installed an "A20 handler", a piece of software to control Gate-A20 and coordinate it to the needs of programs. In protected mode the A20 line needs to be enabled, or else physical addressing errors will occur, likely leading to a system crash.
Switching to real mode.
Intel introduced protected mode into the x86 family with the intention that operating systems which used it would run entirely in the new mode and that all programs running under a protected mode operating system would run in protected mode as well. Because of the substantial differences between real mode and even the rather limited 286 protected mode, programs written for real mode cannot run in protected mode without being rewritten. Therefore, with a wide base of existing real mode applications which users depended on, abandoning real mode posed problems for the industry, and programmers sought a way to switch between the modes at will. However, Intel, consistent with their intentions for the processor's usage, provided an easy way to switch into protected mode on the 80286 but no easy way to switch back to real mode. Before the 386 the only way to switch from protected mode back to real mode was to reset the processor; after a reset it always starts up in real mode to be compatible with earlier x86 CPUs back to the 8086. Resetting the processor does not clear the system's RAM, so this, while awkward and inefficient, is actually feasible. From protected mode, the processor's state is saved in memory, then the processor is reset, restarts in real mode, and executes some real mode code to restore the saved state from memory. It can then run other real mode code until the program is ready to switch back to protected mode. The switch to real mode is costly in terms of time, but this technique allows protected mode programs to use services such as BIOS, which runs entirely in real mode (having been designed originally for the 8088-based IBM Personal Computer model "(machine type)" 5150). This mode-switching technique is also the one used by DPMI (under real, not emulated, DOS) and DOS extenders like DOS/4GW to allow protected mode programs to run under DOS; the DPMI system or DOS extender switches to real mode to invoke DOS or BIOS calls, then switches back to return to the application program which runs in protected mode.
Decline.
The changing towards the NT kernel resulted in the operating system not needing DOS to boot the computer as well as unable to use it. The need to restart the computer in Real Mode MS DOS declined after Windows 3.1x until it was no longer needed. The only way of currently running DOS applications in Real Mode from within newer versions of Windows is by using emulators such as DOSBox or x86 virtualization products.

</doc>
<doc id="79824" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79824" title="PSV">
PSV

PSV may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79829" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79829" title="Hipponax">
Hipponax

Hipponax (; "gen".: Ἱππώνακτος), of Ephesus and later Clazomenae, was an Ancient Greek iambic poet who composed verses depicting the vulgar side of life in Ionian society in the sixth century BC. He was celebrated by ancient authors for his malicious wit (especially for his attacks on some contemporary sculptors, Bupalus and Athenis), and he was reputed to be physically deformed (a reputation that might have been inspired by the nature of his poetry). Little of his work survives despite its interest to Alexandrian scholars, who collected it in two or three books. He influenced Alexandrian poets searching for alternative styles and uses of language, such as Callimachus and Herodas, and his colourful reputation as an acerbic, social critic also made him a popular subject for verse, as in this epigram by Theocritus:
Ancient literary critics credited him with inventing literary parody and "lame" poetic meters suitable for vigorous abuse, as well as with influencing comic dramatists such as Aristophanes. His witty, abusive style appears for example in this quote by Herodian, who however was mainly interested in its linguistic aspects (many of the extant verses were preserved for us by lexicographers and grammarians interested in rare words):
where 'navel-snipper' signifies a midwife.
Life.
Ancient authorities record the barest details about his life (sometimes contradicting each other) and his extant poetry is too fragmentary to support autobiographical interpretation (a hazardous exercise even at the best of times).
The Marmor Parium, only partially preserved in the relevant place, dates him to 541/40 BC, a date supported by Pliny The Elder in this comment on the theme of sculpture:
Archeological corroboration for these dates is found on the pedestal of a statue in Delos, inscribed with the names Micciades and Achermus and dated to 550-30. The poet therefore can be safely dated to the second half of the sixth century. According to Athenaeus, he was small, thin and surprisingly strong The Byzantine encyclopaedia Suda, recorded that he was expelled from Ephesus by the tyrants Athenagoras and Comas, then settled in Clazomenae, and that he wrote verses satirising Bupalis and Athenis because they made insulting likenesses of him. A scholiast commenting on Horace's "Epodes" recorded two differing accounts of the dispute with Bupalus, characterized however as "a painter in Clazomenae": Hipponax sought to marry Bupalus's daughter but was rejected "because" of his physical ugliness, and Bupalus portrayed him as ugly "in order" to provoke laughter. According to the same scholiast, Hipponax retaliated in verse so savagely that Bupalus hanged himself.
Hipponax in that case closely resembles Archilochus of Paros, an earlier iambic poet, who reportedly drove a certain Lycambes and his daughters to hang themselves after he too was rejected in marriage. Such a coincidence invites scepticism. The comic poet Diphilus took the similarity between the two iambic poets even further, representing them as rival lovers of the poetess Sappho
The life of Hipponax, as revealed in the poems, resembles a low-life saga centred on his private enmities, his amorous escapades and his poverty but it is probable he was another Petronius, depicting low-life characters while actually moving in higher social circles. In one fragment, Hipponax decries "Bupalus, the mother-fucker () with Arete", the latter evidently being the mother of Bupalus, yet Arete is presented as performing fellatio on Hipponax in another fragment and, elsewhere, Hipponax complains "Why did you go to bed with that rogue Bupalus?", again apparently referring to Arete (whose name ironically is Greek for 'virtue'). The poet is a man of action but, unlike Archilochus, who served as a warrior on Thasos, his battlefields are close to home:
Hipponax's quarrelsome disposition is also illustrated in verses quoted by Tzetzes, where the bard abuses a painter called Mimnes, and advises him thus:
Work.
Hipponax composed within the Iambus tradition which, in the work of Archilochus, a hundred years earlier, appears to have functioned as ritualized abuse and obscenity associated with the religious cults of Demeter and Dionysus but which, in Hipponax's day, seems rather to have had the purpose of entertainment. In both cases, the genre featured scornful abuse, a bitter tone and sexual permissiveness. 
Unlike Archilochus, however, he frequently refers to himself by name, emerging as a highly self-conscious figure, and his poetry is more narrow and insistently vulgar in scope: "with Hipponax, we are in an unheroic, in fact, a very sordid world", amounting to "a new conception of the poet's function." 
He was considered the inventor of a peculiar metre, the scazon ("halting iambic" as Murray calls it) or choliamb, which substitutes a spondee or trochee for the final iambus of an iambic senarius, and is an appropriate form for the burlesque character of his poems. As an ancient scholar once put it:
Most of the surviving fragments are in choliambs but others feature trochaic tetrameter and even dactyls, the latter sometimes in combination with iambs and even on their own in dactylic hexameter, imitating epic poetry. Ancient scholars in fact credited him with inventing parody and Athenaeus quoted this diatribe against a glutton 'Euromedontiades', composed in dactylic hexameter in mock-heroic imitation of Homer's Odyssey:
Most archaic poets (including the iambic poets Archilochus and Semonides) were influenced by the Ionian epic tradition, as represented in the work of Homer. Except for parody, Hipponax composed as if Homer never existed, avoiding not only heroic sentiment but even epic phrasing and vocabulary. He employed a form of Ionic Greek that included an unusually high proportion of Anatolian and particularly Lydian loanwords, as for example here where he addresses Zeus with the outlandish Lydian word for 'king' (nominative ):
Eating, defecating and fornicating are frequent themes and often they are employed together, as in fragment 92, a tattered papyrus which narrates a sexual encounter in a malodorous privy, where a Lydian-speaking woman performs some esoteric and obscene rites on the narrator, including beating his genitals with a fig branch and inserting something up his anus, provoking incontinence and finally an attack by dung beetles—a wild scene that possibly inspired the 'Oenothea' episode in Petronius's "Satyricon". 
The extant work also includes fragments of epodes (fr. 115-118) but the authorship is disputed by many modern scholars, who attribute them to Archilochus on various grounds, including for example the earlier poet's superior skill in invective and the fragments' resemblance to the tenth epode of Horace (an avowed imitator of Archilochus). Archilochus might also have been the source for an unusually beautiful line attributed to Hipponax (a line that has also been described "as clear, melodious and spare as a line of Sappho"): 
Transmission and reception.
Few fragments of his work survived through the Byzantine period despite his earlier popularity with Alexandrian poets and scholars. The Christian fathers disapproved of his abusive and obscene verses and he was also singled out as unedifying by Julian the Apostate, the pagan emperor, who instructed his priests to "abstain not only from impure and lascivious acts but also from speech and reading of the same character...No initiate shall read Archilochus or Hipponax or any of the authors who write the same kind of thing." Moreover, Hipponax's Ionic dialect and his extensive use of foreign words made his work unsuited to an ancient education system that promoted Attic, the dialect of classical Athens. Today the longest fragment of complete, consecutive verses comprises only six lines. Archeologists working at Oxyrhynchus have added to the meagre collection with tattered scraps of papyrus, of which the longest, published in 1941, has "parts" of over fifty choliambics.
Old Comedy, as a medium for invective and abuse, was a natural successor to iambus from the viewpoint of Aristotle and Aristophanes, the master of Old Comedy, certainly borrowed inspiration from Hipponax: "Someone ought to give them a Bupalus or two on the jaw—that might shut them up for a bit" the men's chorus says about the women's chorus in Lysistrata, and "Wonderful poet, Hipponax!" Dionysus exclaims in Frogs, while trying to disguise the pain inflicted on himself during a flogging. A quote attributed to Hipponax by Stobaeus actually appears to have been composed by a New Comedy poet.

</doc>
<doc id="79830" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79830" title="Bupalus and Athenis">
Bupalus and Athenis

Bupalus () and Athenis (), were sons of Archermus, and members of the celebrated school of sculpture in marble which flourished in Chios in the 6th century BC. They were contemporaries of the poet Hipponax, whom they were said to have caricatured. Their works consisted almost entirely of draped female figures, Artemis, Fortune, The Graces, when the Chian school has been well called a school of Madonnas. Augustus brought many of the works of Bupalus and Athenis to Rome, and placed them on the gable of the temple of Apollo Palatinus. They supposedly committed suicide out of shame when Hipponax wrote caustic satirical poetry about them for revenge.
Aristophanes refers to Bupalus in The Lysistrata. When the Chorus of Men encounter the Chorus of Women near the north-western edge of the Acropolis they ridicule the women, "I warrant, now, if twice or thrice we slap their faces neatly, That they will learn, like Bupalus, to hold their tongues discreetly." (Benjamin Bickley Rogers translation)
It is now suggested that the north (and perhaps also the east) frieze of the Siphnian Treasury in Delphi was the work of Bupalus, based on a partially erased inscription around the circumference of one of the giant's shields, reconstructed as:
"Boupalos son of Archermos made these (sculptures) and those behind."

</doc>
<doc id="79835" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79835" title="Sparta (disambiguation)">
Sparta (disambiguation)

Sparta was a prominent city-state in ancient Greece.
Sparta may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79836" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79836" title="Charles Wheatstone">
Charles Wheatstone

Sir Charles Wheatstone FRS (6 February 1802 – 19 October 1875), was an English scientist and inventor of many scientific breakthroughs of the Victorian era, including the English concertina, the stereoscope (a device for displaying three-dimensional images), and the Playfair cipher (an encryption technique). However, Wheatstone is best known for his contributions in the development of the Wheatstone bridge, originally invented by Samuel Hunter Christie, which is used to measure an unknown electrical resistance, and as a major figure in the development of telegraphy.
Life.
Charles Wheatstone was born in Barnwood, Gloucester. His father was a music-seller in the town, who moved to 128 Pall Mall, London, four years later, becoming a teacher of the flute. Charles, the second son, went to a village school, near Gloucester, and afterwards to several institutions in London. One of them was in Kennington, and kept by a Mrs. Castlemaine, who was astonished at his rapid progress. From another he ran away, but was captured at Windsor, not far from the theatre of his practical telegraph. As a boy he was very shy and sensitive, liking well to retire into an attic, without any other company than his own thoughts.
When he was about fourteen years old he was apprenticed to his uncle and namesake, a maker and seller of musical instruments at 436 Strand, London; but he showed little taste for handicraft or business, and loved better to study books. His father encouraged him in this, and finally took him out of the uncle's charge.
At the age of fifteen, Wheatstone translated French poetry, and wrote two songs, one of which was given to his uncle, who published it without knowing it as his nephew's composition. Some lines of his on the lyre became the motto of an engraving by Bartolozzi. Small for his age, but with a fine brow, and intelligent blue eyes, he often visited an old book-stall in the vicinity of Pall Mall, which was then a dilapidated and unpaved thoroughfare. Most of his pocket-money was spent in purchasing the books which had taken his fancy, whether fairy tales, history, or science. One day, to the surprise of the bookseller, he coveted a volume on the discoveries of Volta in electricity, but not having the price, he saved his pennies and secured the volume. It was written in French, and so he was obliged to save again, until he could buy a dictionary. Then he began to read the volume, and, with the help of his elder brother, William, to repeat the experiments described in it, with a home-made battery, in the scullery behind his father's house. In constructing the battery, the boy philosophers ran short of money to procure the requisite copper-plates. They had only a few copper coins left. A happy thought occurred to Charles, who was the leading spirit in these researches, 'We must use the pennies themselves,' said he, and the battery was soon complete.
At Christchurch, Marylebone, on 12 February 1847, Wheatstone was married to Emma West. She was the daughter of a Taunton tradesman, and of handsome appearance. She died in 1866, leaving a family of five young children to his care. His domestic life was quiet and uneventful.
Though silent and reserved in public, Wheatstone was a clear and voluble talker in private, if taken on his favourite studies, and his small but active person, his plain but intelligent countenance, was full of animation. Sir Henry Taylor tells us that he once observed Wheatstone at an evening party in Oxford earnestly holding forth to Lord Palmerston on the capabilities of his telegraph. 'You don't say so!' exclaimed the statesman. 'I must get you to tell that to the Lord Chancellor.' And so saying, he fastened the electrician on Lord Westbury, and effected his escape. A reminiscence of this interview may have prompted Palmerston to remark that a time was coming when a minister might be asked in Parliament if war had broken out in India, and would reply, 'Wait a minute; I'll just telegraph to the Governor-General, and let you know.'
Wheatstone was knighted in 1868, after his completion of the automatic telegraph. He had previously been made a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Some thirty-four distinctions and diplomas of home or foreign societies bore witness to his scientific reputation. Since 1836 he had been a Fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1859 he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and in 1873 a Foreign Associate of the French Academy of Sciences. The same year he was awarded the Ampere Medal by the French Society for the Encouragement of National Industry. In 1875 he was created an honorary member of the Institution of Civil Engineers. He was a D.C.L. of Oxford and an LL.D. of Cambridge.
While on a visit to Paris during the autumn of 1875, and engaged in perfecting his receiving instrument for submarine cables, he caught a cold, which produced inflammation of the lungs, an illness from which he died in Paris, on 19 October 1875. A memorial service was held in the Anglican Chapel, Paris, and attended by a deputation of the Academy. His remains were taken to his home in Park Crescent, London, (marked by a blue plaque today) and buried in Kensal Green Cemetery.
Music instruments and acoustics.
In September 1821, Wheatstone brought himself into public notice by exhibiting the 'Enchanted Lyre,' or 'Aconcryptophone,' at a music-shop at Pall Mall and in the Adelaide Gallery. It consisted of a mimic lyre hung from the ceiling by a cord, and emitting the strains of several instruments – the piano, harp, and dulcimer. In reality it was a mere sounding box, and the cord was a steel rod that conveyed the vibrations of the music from the several instruments which were played out of sight and ear-shot. At this period Wheatstone made numerous experiments on sound and its transmission. Some of his results are preserved in Thomson's "Annals of Philosophy" for 1823. He recognised that sound is propagated by waves or oscillations of the atmosphere, as light was then believed to be by undulations of the luminiferous ether. Water, and solid bodies, such as glass, or metal, or sonorous wood, convey the modulations with high velocity, and he conceived the plan of transmitting sound-signals, music, or speech to long distances by this means. He estimated that sound would travel through solid rods, and proposed to telegraph from London to Edinburgh in this way. He even called his arrangement a 'telephone.' (Robert Hooke, in his "Micrographia", published in 1667, writes: 'I can assure the reader that I have, by the help of a distended wire, propagated the sound to a very considerable distance in an instant, or with as seemingly quick a motion as that of light.' Nor was it essential the wire should be straight; it might be bent into angles. This property is the basis of the mechanical or lover's telephone, said to have been known to the Chinese many centuries ago. Hooke also considered the possibility of finding a way to quicken our powers of hearing.) A writer in the "Repository of Arts" for 1 September 1821, in referring to the 'Enchanted Lyre,' beholds the prospect of an opera being performed at the King's Theatre, and enjoyed at the Hanover Square Rooms, or even at the Horns Tavern, Kennington. The vibrations are to travel through underground conductors, like to gas in pipes.
Besides transmitting sounds to a distance, Wheatstone devised a simple instrument for augmenting feeble sounds, to which he gave the name of 'Microphone.' It consisted of two slender rods, which conveyed the mechanical vibrations to both ears, and is quite different from the electrical microphone of Professor Hughes.
In 1823, his uncle, the musical instrument maker, died, and Wheatstone, with his elder brother, William, took over the business. Charles had no great liking for the commercial part, but his ingenuity found a vent in making improvements on the existing instruments, and in devising philosophical toys. He also invented instruments of his own. One of the most famous was the Wheatstone concertina. It was a six sided instrument with 64 keys. These keys provided for simple chromatic fingerings. The English Concertina became increasingly famous throughout his lifetime, however it didn't reach its peak of popularity until the early 20th century.
In 1827, Wheatstone introduced his 'kaleidophone', a device for rendering the vibrations of a sounding body apparent to the eye. It consists of a metal rod, carrying at its end a silvered bead, which reflects a 'spot' of light. As the rod vibrates the spot is seen to describe complicated figures in the air, like a spark whirled about in the darkness. His photometer was probably suggested by this appliance. It enables two lights to be compared by the relative brightness of their reflections in a silvered bead, which describes a narrow ellipse, so as to draw the spots into parallel lines.
In 1828, Wheatstone improved the German wind instrument, called the "Mundharmonika", until it became the popular concertina, patented on 19 December 1829 [http://www.concertina.com/patents/index.htm#wheatstone-patent-1829]. The portable harmonium is another of his inventions, which gained a prize medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851. He also improved the speaking machine of De Kempelen, and endorsed the opinion of Sir David Brewster, that before the end of this century a singing and talking apparatus would be among the conquests of science.
In 1834, Wheatstone, who had won a name for himself, was appointed to the Chair of Experimental Physics in King's College London. His first course of lectures on sound were a complete failure, due to his abhorrence of public speaking. In the rostrum he was tongue-tied and incapable, sometimes turning his back on the audience and mumbling to the diagrams on the wall. In the laboratory he felt himself at home, and ever after confined his duties mostly to demonstration.
Velocity of electricity.
He achieved renown by a great experiment made in 1834 – the measurement of the velocity of electricity in a wire. He cut the wire at the middle, to form a gap which a spark might leap across, and connected its ends to the poles of a Leyden jar filled with electricity. Three sparks were thus produced, one at each end of the wire, and another at the middle. He mounted a tiny mirror on the works of a watch, so that it revolved at a high velocity, and observed the reflections of his three sparks in it. The points of the wire were so arranged that if the sparks were instantaneous, their reflections would appear in one straight line; but the middle one was seen to lag behind the others, because it was an instant later. The electricity had taken a certain time to travel from the ends of the wire to the middle. This time was found by measuring the amount of lag, and comparing it with the known velocity of the mirror. Having got the time, he had only to compare that with the length of half the wire, and he could find the velocity of electricity. His results gave a calculated velocity of 288,000 miles per second, i.e. faster than what we now know to be the speed of light (), but were nonetheless an interesting approximation.
It was already appreciated by some scientists that the “velocity” of electricity was dependent on the properties of the conductor and its surroundings. Francis Ronalds had observed signal retardation in his buried electric telegraph cable (but not his airborne line) in 1816 and outlined its cause to be induction. Wheatstone witnessed these experiments as a youth, which were apparently a stimulus for his own research in telegraphy. Decades later, after the telegraph had been commercialised, Michael Faraday described how the velocity of an electric field in a submarine wire, coated with insulator and surrounded with water, is only , or still less.
Wheatstone's device of the revolving mirror was afterwards employed by Léon Foucault and Hippolyte Fizeau to measure the velocity of light.
Spectroscopy.
Wheatstone and others also contributed to early spectroscopy through the discovery and exploitation of spectral emission lines.
As John Munro wrote in 1891, "In 1835, at the Dublin meeting of the British Association, Wheatstone showed that when metals were volatilised in the electric spark, their light, examined through a prism, revealed certain rays which were characteristic of them. Thus the kind of metals which formed the sparking points could be determined by analysing the light of the spark. This suggestion has been of great service in spectrum analysis, and as applied by Robert Bunsen, Gustav Robert Kirchhoff, and others, has led to the discovery of several new elements, such as rubidium and thallium, as well as increasing our knowledge of the heavenly bodies."
Telegraph.
Wheatstone abandoned his idea of transmitting intelligence by the mechanical vibration of rods, and took up the electric telegraph. In 1835 he lectured on the system of Baron Schilling, and declared that the means were already known by which an electric telegraph could be made of great service to the world. He made experiments with a plan of his own, and not only proposed to lay an experimental line across the Thames, but to establish it on the London and Birmingham Railway. Before these plans were carried out, however, he received a visit from Mr William Fothergill Cooke at his house in Conduit Street on 27 February 1837, which had an important influence on his future.
Cooperation with Cooke.
Mr. Cooke was an officer in the Madras army, who, being home on leave, was attending some lectures on anatomy at the University of Heidelberg, where, on 6 March 1836, he witnessed a demonstration with the telegraph of professor Georg Wilhelm Munke, and was so impressed with its importance, that he forsook his medical studies and devoted all his efforts to the work of introducing the telegraph. He returned to London soon after, and was able to exhibit a telegraph with three needles in January 1837. Feeling his want of scientific knowledge, he consulted Michael Faraday and Peter Mark Roget (then secretary of the Royal Society), the latter of whom sent him to Wheatstone.
At a second interview, Mr. Cooke told Wheatstone of his intention to bring out a working telegraph, and explained his method. Wheatstone, according to his own statement, remarked to Cooke that the method would not act, and produced his own experimental telegraph. Finally, Cooke proposed that they should enter into a partnership, but Wheatstone was at first reluctant to comply. He was a well-known man of science, and had meant to publish his results without seeking to make capital of them. Cooke, on the other hand, declared that his sole object was to make a fortune from the scheme. In May they agreed to join their forces, Wheatstone contributing the scientific, and Cooke the administrative talent. The deed of partnership was dated 19 November 1837. A joint patent was taken out for their inventions, including the five-needle telegraph of Wheatstone, and an alarm worked by a relay, in which the current, by dipping a needle into mercury, completed a local circuit, and released the detent of a clockwork.
The five-needle telegraph, which was mainly, if not entirely, due to Wheatstone, was similar to that of Schilling, and based on the principle enunciated by André-Marie Ampère – that is to say, the current was sent into the line by completing the circuit of the battery with a make and break key, and at the other end it passed through a coil of wire surrounding a magnetic needle free to turn round its centre. According as one pole of the battery or the other was applied to the line by means of the key, the current deflected the needle to one side or the other. There were five separate circuits actuating five different needles. The latter were pivoted in rows across the middle of a dial shaped like a diamond, and having the letters of the alphabet arranged upon it in such a way that a letter was literally pointed out by the current deflecting two of the needles towards it.
Early installations.
An experimental line, with a sixth return wire, was run between the Euston terminus and Camden Town station of the London and North Western Railway on 25 July 1837. The actual distance was only one and a half-mile (2.4 km), but spare wire had been inserted in the circuit to increase its length. It was late in the evening before the trial took place. Mr Cooke was in charge at Camden Town, while Mr Robert Stephenson and other gentlemen looked on; and Wheatstone sat at his instrument in a dingy little room, lit by a tallow candle, near the booking-office at Euston. Wheatstone sent the first message, to which Cooke replied, and 'never' said Wheatstone, 'did I feel such a tumultuous sensation before, as when, all alone in the still room, I heard the needles click, and as I spelled the words, I felt all the magnitude of the invention pronounced to be practicable beyond cavil or dispute.'
In spite of this trial, however, the directors of the railway treated the 'new-fangled' invention with indifference, and requested its removal. In July 1839, however, it was favoured by the Great Western Railway, and a line erected from the Paddington station terminus to West Drayton railway station, a distance of thirteen miles (21 km). Part of the wire was laid underground at first, but subsequently all of it was raised on posts along the line. Their circuit was eventually extended to in 1841, and was publicly exhibited at Paddington as a marvel of science, which could transmit fifty signals a distance of 280,000 miles per minute (7,500 km/s). The price of admission was a shilling (£0.05), and in 1844 one fascinated observer recorded the following:
""It is perfect from the terminus of the Great Western as far as"
"Slough – that is, eighteen miles; the wires being in some places"
"underground in tubes, and in others high up in the air, which last,"
"he says, is by far the best plan. We asked if the weather did not"
"affect the wires, but he said not; a violent thunderstorm might"
"ring a bell, but no more. We were taken into a small room (we"
"being Mrs Drummond, Miss Philips, Harry Codrington and"
"myself – and afterwards the Milmans and Mr Rich) where were"
"several wooden cases containing different sorts of telegraphs. "
"In one sort every word was spelt, and as each letter was placed in turn"
"in a particular position, the machinery caused the electric fluid to run"
"down the line, where it made the letter show itself at Slough, by what"
"machinery he could not undertake to explain. After each word came a "
"sign from Slough, signifying "I understand", coming certainly in less "
"than one second from the end of the word...Another prints the messages"
"it brings, so that if no-one attended to the bell...the message would not"
"be lost. This is effected by the electrical fluid causing a little hammer to strike the"
"letter which presents itself, the letter which is raised hits some manifold "
"writing paper (a new invention, black paper which, if pressed, leaves an "
"indelible black mark), by which means the impression is left on white paper"
"beneath. This was the most ingenious of all, and apparently Mr. Wheatstone's"
"favourite; he was very good-natured in explaining but"
"understands it so well himself that he cannot feel how little we"
"know about it, and goes too fast for such ignorant folk to follow"
"him in everything. Mrs Drummond told me he is wonderful for"
"the rapidity with which he thinks and his power of invention; he"
"invents so many things that he cannot put half his ideas into"
"execution, but leaves them to be picked up and used by others,"
"who get the credit of them.""
Public attention and success.
The public took to the new invention after the capture of the murderer John Tawell, who in 1845, had become the first person to be arrested as the result of telecommunications technology. In the same year, Wheatstone introduced two improved forms of the apparatus, namely, the 'single' and the 'double' needle instruments, in which the signals were made by the successive deflections of the needles. Of these, the single-needle instrument, requiring only one wire, is still in use.
The development of the telegraph may be gathered from two facts. In 1855, the death of the Emperor Nicholas at St. Petersburg, about one o'clock in the afternoon, was announced in the House of Lords a few hours later. The result of The Oaks of 1890 was received in New York fifteen seconds after the horses passed the winning-post.
Differences with Cooke.
In 1841 a difference arose between Cooke and Wheatstone as to the share of each in the honour of inventing the telegraph. The question was submitted to the arbitration of the famous engineer, Marc Isambard Brunel, on behalf of Cooke, and Professor Daniell, of King's College, the inventor of the Daniell battery, on the part of Wheatstone. They awarded to Cooke the credit of having introduced the telegraph as a useful undertaking which promised to be of national importance, and to Wheatstone that of having by his researches prepared the public to receive it. They concluded with the words: 'It is to the united labours of two gentlemen so well qualified for mutual assistance that we must attribute the rapid progress which this important invention has made during five years since they have been associated.' The decision, however vague, pronounces the needle telegraph a joint production. If it had mainly been invented by Wheatstone, it was chiefly introduced by Cooke. Their respective shares in the undertaking might be compared to that of an author and his publisher, but for the fact that Cooke himself had a share in the actual work of invention.
Further work on telegraphs.
From 1836–7 Wheatstone had thought a good deal about submarine telegraphs, and in 1840 he gave evidence before the Railway Committee of the House of Commons on the feasibility of the proposed line from Dover to Calais. He had even designed the machinery for making and laying the cable. In the autumn of 1844, with the assistance of Mr. J. D. Llewellyn, he submerged a length of insulated wire in Swansea Bay, and signalled through it from a boat to the Mumbles Lighthouse. Next year he suggested the use of gutta-percha for the coating of the intended wire across the English Channel.
In 1840 Wheatstone had patented an alphabetical telegraph, or, 'Wheatstone A B C instrument,' which moved with a step-by-step motion, and showed the letters of the message upon a dial. The same principle was used in his type-printing telegraph, patented in 1841. This was the first apparatus which printed a telegram in type. It was worked by two circuits, and as the type revolved a hammer, actuated by the current, pressed the required letter on the paper.
The introduction of the telegraph had so far advanced that, on 2 September 1845, the Electric Telegraph Company was registered, and Wheatstone, by his deed of partnership with Cooke, received a sum of £33,000 for the use of their joint inventions.
In 1859 Wheatstone was appointed by the Board of Trade to report on the subject of the Atlantic cables, and in 1864 he was one of the experts who advised the Atlantic Telegraph Company on the construction of the successful lines of 1865 and 1866.
In 1870 the electric telegraph lines of the United Kingdom, worked by different companies, were transferred to the Post Office, and placed under Government control.
Wheatstone further invented the automatic transmitter, in which the signals of the message are first punched out on a strip of paper, which is then passed through the sending-key, and controls the signal currents. By substituting a mechanism for the hand in sending the message, he was able to telegraph about 100 words a minute, or five times the ordinary rate. In the Postal Telegraph service this apparatus is employed for sending Press telegrams, and it has recently been so much improved, that messages are now sent from London to Bristol at a speed of 600 words a minute, and even of 400 words a minute between London and Aberdeen. On the night of 8 April 1886, when Mr. Gladstone introduced his Bill for Home Rule in Ireland, no fewer than 1,500,000 words were dispatched from the central station at St. Martin's-le-Grand by 100 Wheatstone transmitters. The plan of sending messages by a running strip of paper which actuates the key was originally patented by Bain in 1846; but Wheatstone, aided by Mr. Augustus Stroh, an accomplished mechanician, and an able experimenter, was the first to bring the idea into successful operation. This system is often referred to as the Wheatstone Perforator and is the forerunner of the stock market Ticker tape
Optics.
Stereopsis was first described by Wheatstone in 1838. In 1840 he was awarded the Royal Medal of the Royal Society for his explanation of binocular vision, a research which led him to make stereoscopic drawings and construct the stereoscope. He showed that our impression of solidity is gained by the combination in the mind of two separate pictures of an object taken by both of our eyes from different points of view. Thus, in the stereoscope, an arrangement of lenses or mirrors, two photographs of the same object taken from different points are so combined as to make the object stand out with a solid aspect. Sir David Brewster improved the stereoscope by dispensing with the mirrors, and bringing it into its existing form with lenses.
The 'pseudoscope' (Wheatstone coined the term from the Greek ψευδίς σκοπειν) was introduced in 1852, and is in some sort the reverse of the stereoscope, since it causes a solid object to seem hollow, and a nearer one to be farther off; thus, a bust appears to be a mask, and a tree growing outside of a window looks as if it were growing inside the room. Its purpose was to test his theory of stereo vision and for investigations into what would now be called experimental psychology.
Measuring time.
In 1840, Wheatstone introduced his chronoscope, for measuring minute intervals of time, which was used in determining the speed of a bullet or the passage of a star. In this apparatus an electric current actuated an electro-magnet, which noted the instant of an occurrence by means of a pencil on a moving paper. It is said to have been capable of distinguishing 1/7300 part of a second (137 microsecond), and the time a body took to fall from a height of one inch (25 mm).
On 26 November 1840, he exhibited his electro-magnetic clock in the library of the Royal Society, and propounded a plan for distributing the correct time from a standard clock to a number of local timepieces. The circuits of these were to be electrified by a key or contact-maker actuated by the arbour of the standard, and their hands corrected by electro-magnetism. The following January Alexander Bain took out a patent for an electro-magnetic clock, and he subsequently charged Wheatstone with appropriating his ideas. It appears that Bain worked as a mechanist to Wheatstone from August to December 1840, and he asserted that he had communicated the idea of an electric clock to Wheatstone during that period; but Wheatstone maintained that he had experimented in that direction during May. Bain further accused Wheatstone of stealing his idea of the electro-magnetic printing telegraph; but Wheatstone showed that the instrument was only a modification of his own electro-magnetic telegraph.
In 1840, Alexander Bain mentioned to the Mechanics Magazine editor his financial problems. He introduced him to Sir Charles Wheatstone. Bain demonstrated his models to Wheatstone, who, when asked for his opinion, said "Oh, I shouldn't bother to develop these things any further! There's no future in them." Three months later Wheatstone demonstrated an electric clock to the Royal Society, claiming it was his own invention. However, Bain had already applied for a patent for it. Wheatstone tried to block Bain's patents, but failed. When Wheatstone organised an Act of Parliament to set up the Electric Telegraph Company, the House of Lords summoned Bain to give evidence, and eventually compelled the company to pay Bain £10,000 and give him a job as manager, causing Wheatstone to resign.
One of Wheatstone's most ingenious devices was the 'Polar clock,' exhibited at the meeting of the British Association in 1848. It is based on the fact discovered by Sir David Brewster, that the light of the sky is polarised in a plane at an angle of ninety degrees from the position of the sun. It follows that by discovering that plane of polarisation, and measuring its azimuth with respect to the north, the position of the sun, although beneath the horizon, could be determined, and the apparent solar time obtained. The clock consisted of a spyglass, having a nicol (double-image) prism for an eyepiece, and a thin plate of selenite for an object-glass. When the tube was directed to the North Pole—that is, parallel to the Earth's axis—and the prism of the eyepiece turned until no colour was seen, the angle of turning, as shown by an index moving with the prism over a graduated limb, gave the hour of day. The device is of little service in a country where watches are reliable; but it formed part of the equipment of the 1875–1876 North Polar expedition commanded by Captain Nares.
Wheatstone bridge.
In 1843 Wheatstone communicated an important paper to the Royal Society, entitled 'An Account of Several New Processes for Determining the Constants of a Voltaic Circuit.' It contained an exposition of the well known balance for measuring the electrical resistance of a conductor, which still goes by the name of Wheatstone's Bridge or balance, although it was first devised by Samuel Hunter Christie, of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, who published it in the "Philosophical Transactions" for 1833. The method was neglected until Wheatstone brought it into notice. His paper abounds with simple and practical formulae for the calculation of currents and resistances by the law of Ohm. He introduced a unit of resistance, namely, a foot of copper wire weighing one hundred grains (6.5 g), and showed how it might be applied to measure the length of wire by its resistance. He was awarded a medal for his paper by the Society. The same year he invented an apparatus which enabled the reading of a thermometer or a barometer to be registered at a distance by means of an electric contact made by the mercury. A sound telegraph, in which the signals were given by the strokes of a bell, was also patented by Cooke and Wheatstone in May of that year.
Cryptography.
Wheatstone's remarkable ingenuity was also displayed in the invention of cyphers. He was responsible for the then unusual Playfair cipher, named after his friend Lord Playfair. It was used by the militaries of several nations through at least World War I, and is known to have been used during World War II by British intelligence services.
It was initially resistant to cryptoanalysis, but methods were eventually developed to break it. He also became involved in the interpretation of cypher manuscripts in the British Museum. He devised a cryptograph or machine for turning a message into cypher which could only be interpreted by putting the cypher into a corresponding machine adjusted to decrypt it.
Electrical generators.
In 1840, Wheatstone brought out his magneto-electric machine for generating continuous currents.
On 4 February 1867, he published the principle of reaction in the dynamo-electric machine by a paper to the Royal Society; but Mr. C. W. Siemens had communicated the identical discovery ten days earlier, and both papers were read on the same day.
It afterwards appeared that Werner von Siemens, Samuel Alfred Varley, and Wheatstone had independently arrived at the principle within a few months of each other. Varley patented it on 24 December 1866; Siemens called attention to it on 17 January 1867; and Wheatstone exhibited it in action at the Royal Society on the above date.
Disputes over invention.
Wheatstone was involved in various disputes with other scientists through his life regarding his role in different technologies. As well as William Fothergill Cooke, Alexander Bain and David Brewster, mentioned above, these also included Francis Ronalds. Wheatstone was erroneously believed by many to have created the atmospheric electricity observing apparatus Ronalds developed at Kew Observatory in the 1840s and also to have installed the first automatically recording meteorological instruments there (see for example, Howarth, p158).

</doc>
<doc id="79842" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79842" title="Destiny (DC Comics)">
Destiny (DC Comics)

Destiny is a DC Comics character created by Marv Wolfman and Bernie Wrightson, first appearing in "Weird Mystery Tales" #1 (1972), and was regular host of that series for the first fourteen issues, after which he hosted "Secrets of Haunted House". He is one of the Endless in Neil Gaiman's comic book series, "The Sandman". In "The Sandman Special" #1, he was also referred to by his Greek name, Potmos. In 1997, he starred in an eponymous three-issue limited series written by Alisa Kwitney.
Destiny is portrayed as a tall figure, obscured within a purple or brown robe and cowl. He reads from a large book, originally known as the Cosmic Log, chained to his right wrist, which contains all past, present, and future events. He does not leave footprints, nor does he cast a shadow. Destiny is blind, although this doesn't appear to hinder him and it has been stated that, opposed to simply being blind, Destiny '...sees everything.' He is always calm, detached, and somber even in extreme situations.
Early appearances.
Like Lucien, Cain and Abel and some other "Sandman" characters, Destiny first appeared as host of a 1970s DC horror comic, "Weird Mystery Tales". There was, of course, no mention of his family, though a more traditional version of Death did appear in it. In his earliest appearances, he was less of a storyteller than an introducer, as most of his stories were actually told by Jack Kirby's Dr. E. Leopold Maas, an investigator of paranormal phenomena.
Destiny began appearing in some of the stories beginning in issue #10 (though he said that as all the stories he tells deal with destiny, he is in all of them, as well). By issue #15, Eve had taken over the series, and had been wheedling in since early in the run. Destiny now hosted a new title, "Secrets of Haunted House", which was initially hosted by all four characters. The other hosts regarded him as the dullest storyteller, and as the hosts supposedly controlled the letters pages (responses were written in-character), that attitude was generally reflected there as well. For his birthday, Cain, Abel, and Eve gave him a sampler that said "If you're so smart, why don't you have your own book?" although, being blind, he would be unable to read it. Later, he was said to be the son of a "Mrs. Emma Destiny," but as this was in a letters column, it may have been intended as a spoof. Destiny left the series after issue #39, after which it was hosted by Abel. ("House of Secrets" had been canceled, and the House was said to have been torn down.)
Destiny met Superman in "Superman" #352, preventing Superman from helping people in order to break a forming destiny of Metropolis becoming dependent upon him, and met the New Teen Titans on several occasions, all of these written by Wolfman.
According to "Who's Who: The Definitive Directory of the DC Universe" #6 (1985), Destiny is "the one being who has been able to resist Zeus' unlimited powers." It refers to the Cosmic Log as "Book of Souls". It reports "Cosmic Observer" as his occupation and "inapplicable" for the field, "Known Relatives."
Vertigo.
"The Sandman".
In "The Sandman", Destiny is revealed in issue #7 as the eldest of the Endless. Destiny's realm is The Garden of Forking Ways, where he continually walks its maze-like paths. His book, referred to as the Book of Destiny rather than the Cosmic Log, is his sigil in the galleries of the other Endless.
He is the least characterized and least used of the Endless in the series. Though he was first depicted in the series in a picture at the end of the first collection, his first actual appearance is in the fourth collection, "". In a quiet way, he seems to direct the family affairs of the Endless; it is he who calls the family meeting that begins "Season of Mists".
"The Books of Magic".
Destiny makes a brief appearance in "The Books of Magic"'s fourth issue "Book IV: The Road to Nowhere". In it, Mister E takes Timothy Hunter to the end of time intending to kill him. Destiny confronts them because they do not belong there. Death appears because it is time for him to die. In his final moments, Destiny remarks that he thought the end would never come and that he would never get to the last page of The Book of Destiny. He then vanishes. Before she finally ends the Universe Death sends Timothy Hunter back to his own time and forces Mr. E to find his own way back.
"Lucifer".
In the series "Lucifer" by Mike Carey, Destiny is shown talking to Lucifer. Both seem to have a contempt for each other, where Lucifer favors chaos and freedom, and Destiny favors order and control.
"Destiny: A Chronicle of Deaths Foretold".
Destiny is also featured in the three-issue miniseries "", authored by Alisa Kwitney with art by Kent Williams, Michael Zulli, Scott Hampton, and Rebecca Guay. Destiny is there shown transforming the son of Byzantine Empress Theodora into a pestilence-bearing Horseman of the Apocalypse. The Horseman spreads bubonic plague throughout eras of human civilization while searching for a woman he can love and spare. The frame story focuses on the Horseman's appearance in the 21st century, where he offers a glimpse of Destiny's book to the frightened survivors of the latest plague.
Recently.
Destiny met Chronos, Walker Gabriel in "Chronos" # 9, where it is revealed his book "can" be changed, and entire sections can be warped or erased, albeit at great personal cost; this applies with even more force when a time traveller such as Gabriel attempts to change the timestream to satisfy a personal wish. In Gabriel's case, he manages to save his mother from an early death, but in the process erased himself from history. Destiny also met Lobo and Supergirl in his labyrinth in "The Brave and the Bold" volume 2, #4. He is more nervous and absent-minded in his demeanor, as a result of having to give up his book.
Destiny lost the Book of Destiny in the opening storyline of the new "Brave and the Bold" series, and when Lobo and Supergirl arrive in his garden he speaks about how it was intended to reach the four men who existed outside its pages, in the process waylaid by the Luck Lords in a bid to reshape reality. As it turns out, the Challengers of the Unknown were these men, the recipients Destiny had sent it off to be procured by. After a struggle between all factions at the culmination of the arc, the Challengers arrive by Zeta Beam to Rann and acquire the book after defeating the opposition and defeating the Luck Lords. After, it was to be in their care. 
After this arc, the book remained in the Challengers' hands; the Challs consulted it to follow the plan of an ancient alchemist, Megistus. Within the pages, they followed the stories of several relics Megistus sought for a master plan; amongst these were some of the most dangerous objects on the DCU. The Warlock of Ys, an old Antimatter Universe foe, even manifested on Challenger Mountain by constructing a shell for himself out of the pages of the book. Destiny himself appeared in the underground lair of the Challs, showing them his book for the final time as a reward for their sacrifice and service in defeating Megistus, in issue #12; the book revealed June Masters, an unofficial member of the Challengers, had cheated Death and managed to escape, blasting herself out of the book much like the Challengers.
Destiny's Book.
The book contains everything that was, is, and will be. It is chained to Destiny's wrist. Destiny is blind, yet can somehow read from the book. The book is said to not have a separate existence from Destiny in the Lucifer series, so that Michael Demiurgos could not take it away and read from it. Destiny claims he cannot read aloud from the book because then the book becomes an element of the story it tells, which would cause disaster. However, the Challengers of the Unknown and others in the new "Brave and the Bold" series possess the book without Destiny present and can read aloud information from the book. It may be concluded that Destiny was lying to Michael. Another possibility is that the Challengers of the Unknown's existence outside the book caused the normal rules governing the book to be altered or that simply rules have changed after Elaine replaced Yahweh. Once, Cain and Abel tried to steal Destiny's book from a pedestal, on the grounds that it would make him unable to tell stories. They had previously tried to hide it from him in a room full of duplicates.
The book represents a predestination philosophy. Everything that will happen was known must happen when the book was first written at the dawn of time. This is not always the case, because we have seen times in the new "Brave and the Bold" series where the book changes.
Yahweh is the author of the book. The script of the book changes after Yahweh abandons his creation, coming to a turning point of the original script (presumably what was written in The Books of Magic). Elaine Belloc, Yahweh's granddaughter has now taken over Yahweh's position, whether or not she will renew the original Script or not it is yet to be revealed.

</doc>
<doc id="79843" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79843" title="Death (DC Comics)">
Death (DC Comics)

Death is a fictional character from the DC comic book series, "The Sandman" (1989–1996). The character first appeared in "The Sandman" vol. 2, #8 (August 1989), and was created by Neil Gaiman and Mike Dringenberg.
In the stories, Death is both the end of life and a psychopomp. Like most anthropomorphic personifications of death, Death meets with the recently deceased and guides them into their new existence. However, unlike most personifications of death, she also visits people as they are born, according to Destruction in the "Sandman Special: The Song of Orpheus". Evidently, only she seems to remember these encounters. In the special issue, it is also revealed that Death was known in Ancient Greece as Teleute.
Physically, Death is also opposite to the traditional western culture personification of death (see Grim Reaper). In "The Sandman", Death instead appears as an attractive, pale young goth woman dressed in casual clothes - often a black top and jeans. She also wears a silver ankh on a chain around her neck, and has a marking similar to the eye of Horus around her right eye. She is pleasant, down-to-earth, perky, and has been a nurturing figure for both incarnations of Dream. This irony has helped make Death one of the most popular characters from "Sandman". Death was named the fifteenth greatest comic book character by "Empire Magazine".
Publication history.
Other personifications of Death have appeared in the DC Universe. These altering physical appearances may be rationalized as being completely different characters with an unknown relation (or lack thereof) to the overall Death shown in the "Sandman" series, or may be explained by a sequence at the beginning of the "Sandman" series. In the sequence where Morpheus is searching for his objects of power, he appears at Martian Manhunter's door, and for a frame we see him as Martian Manhunter sees him: it's nothing like humans see him. This could indicate that the physical appearance of the Endless (the appearance of Dream, at the very least) is subject to the mind of the person doing the observing. Many references are made throughout Death and the Sandman series which indicate that perception of the form of the Endless is subjective, not objective.
In "Captain Atom" #42 Death appears alongside Black Racer of the New Gods and Nekron (a being embodying the will of "The Black", the solitude and peace death represents from "Green Lantern"). The story stated that all three were equal, representing different aspects of death. Gaiman has denied this, however, and his stories make it clear that Death of the Endless is the ultimate personification of Death. It might be assumed, however, Nekron, the Racer, and the Black Flash are connected to her in some way. Alternatively, there may be multiple avatars or gods of Death in the DC universe, besides those claiming to be Death. Blackest Night has resolved this apparent contradiction or ambiguity, with Nekron no longer being referred to as an aspect of death but instead as a construct formed of darkness in response to the emerging light of the emotional spectrum.
A more traditional version of Death, a skeleton in a bluish or purplish cloak, appeared as host in such DC titles such as "Weird Mystery Tales", "House of Secrets", "Ghosts", "Weird War Tales" (including being in the story in issue #94), "DC Comics Presents" #29, etc. "Weird War Tales" typically featured Death as a skeleton in some sort of military uniform relevant to the era and locality of the war depicted. This character appeared as recently as "Elvira's House of Mystery" #2 (February 1986). How this pre-Crisis Death relates to Gaiman's Death, if at all, is unclear, although her older brother Destiny appeared with the character, and both Deaths have appeared with incarnations of Superman. Superman referred to the earlier Death with the term "Grim Reaper", so perhaps that could be regarded as a distinct character, however, in the pages of "Weird War Tales", he called himself "Death." He also appeared when "Weird War Tales" was published under the Vertigo imprint and in the 2010 "Weird War Tales" one-shot.
Death first appeared as a woman in "The Witching Hour" #56 (July 1975) in a tale told by Mordred (written by Carl Wessler and illustrated by Ruben Yandoc). She was depicted with short, curly, red-blonde hair, and was a rival for two men's affections. Both men die in successive car accidents.
In "Swamp Thing" vol. 2, #6, The Phantom Stranger met Death in the form of a middle-aged gentleman, possibly inspired by "Death Takes a Holiday". In the story, a young woman, Margaret "Maggie" Brennan, had what should have been a minor head injury and at one glimpse of Death chose to become Death's bride. As someone newly dead herself, she taught Death that he needs to show compassion for the newly dead to allay their fears. He takes her advice and they both serve as aspects of Death. This version of Death was created by Mike W. Barr and Dan Spiegle. Maggie is blonde and bears only minor physical resemblance to Gaiman and Dringenberg's version, though her compassionate nature is a similarity. In "The Spectre" (vol. 2), The Phantom Stranger himself appeared to be the only psychopomp in the DC Universe.
The current incarnation of Death first appeared in the final chapter of "Sandman"’s first story arc ', "The Sound of Her Wings", (issue #8) where she gave Dream direction and a degree of understanding. Death instantly became very popular with readers, and she appears at least briefly in each of the nine subsequent story arcs. However, Gaiman attempted to entice and tease readers by rationing out the number of appearances from Dream’s family, so Death did not appear as frequently as one might expect for such a popular character. At the end of the ninth Sandman story arc ', there is a lengthy and noteworthy appearance from Death, in which she finally brings her brother peace.
Character design.
According to Gaiman, the initial visual design of Death was based on a friend of Dringenberg's named Cinamon Hadley. From "The Sandman Companion":
McKean also used a series of professional English models for representations of Death on covers of "Sandman."
Despite some rumors, Death is not based on Gaiman's friend Tori Amos.
Death's apparent age varies slightly. In the picture above, from "Death: The Time of Your Life", she appears to be a teenager. In most "Sandman" stories she looks to be in her mid-twenties. In the giveaway "Death Talks About Life" (an AIDS-prevention giveaway), Death appears to be about thirty, with wrinkle lines in her forehead that are not usually present.
Fictional character biography.
Death is the second eldest of the Endless, a family of anthropomorphic beings. Death is possibly the most powerful of the Endless (and may be the most powerful being in the universe) having been shown (in a flashback in ') to be virtually omniscient and being able to intimidate the Furies, who show no fear of the other Endless, simply by raising her voice in '. The witch Thessaly mentions that Death is the only one of the Endless who is bound by no rules, supported in Dream's portion of "" in which she briefly makes an appearance at a conference designed to set functions for entities and leaves before it begins. In addition, it is mentioned in "Brief Lives" that she is the only one of the Endless who may survive the end of this incarnation of the universe. Death's realm is not portrayed in detail in the series, except for a brief scene in her 'house' in the "Sandman Special", "Song of Orpheus", and later in "The Books of Magic" series. This is where she keeps her floppy hat collection, her goldfish Slim and Wandsworth and possibly her gallery. A brief glimpse of her realm can also be seen in "The Little Endless Storybook", when Barnabas visits her, although this time in her 'apartment suite.'
One day every century, Death lives (and dies) as a mortal, in order to understand the value of the life she takes. She does this by becoming a mortal fated to die that day. At the end of "" her Endless self briefly converses with her mortal self.
Powers and abilities.
Death is an immortal being of virtual omnipotence and omnipresence. However, it has been established that she cannot claim beings as powerful as the likes of Lucifer Morningstar or Michael Demiurgos.
Appearances.
Vertigo Comics.
Death's popularity saw her spun off into two solo limited series, ' (1993), and ' (1996). Both were written by Gaiman and illustrated by Chris Bachalo, and dealt with Death's encounters with various mortals. "Death: The High Cost of Living" became the first comic released under the newly instigated Vertigo branding in 1993, at which point "The Sandman" also moved from the DC to Vertigo imprint. A third miniseries, "The Girl who Would Be Death" by Caitlín R. Kiernan, was about a girl who purchased an ankh stolen from Death and tried to become her. Death is never actually seen in the series, but she speaks and acts in the third and fourth issues of the four issue series.
In 2003, the manga-style graphic novel ' portrayed Death's activities during the fourth Sandman story arc '. It was written and illustrated by Jill Thompson, and the format proved popular enough for Thompson to produce the similarly manga-influenced follow-up "Dead Boy Detectives", featuring minor "Sandman" characters, and "featuring a cameo by Death."
A one-shot issue titled "A Death Gallery" (1994) was released as one of several art showcase comics spotlighting various Sandman characters released between 1994 and 1995. The "Death Gallery" featured representations of Death by more than thirty comics artists, including a rough sketch by Gaiman himself. In "" (2003) Gaiman shows Death several billion years ago, with a markedly different personality — forbidding and joyless.
She also appears in "The Books of Magic" (first volume, 1991, also written by Gaiman) at the very end of time, where her function is to set things in order and close the universe down. She meets Timothy Hunter and Mister E there after Mister E has taken Timothy all the way to the end of time, because only there can he kill Timothy without fear of interference. Death stops the murder on the grounds that "I took both of you billions of years ago." She sends Timothy back home, but forces Mister E to return the hard way. John Ney Rieber included her in "The Books of Magic" (vol. 2 #3-4), in which she lets Timothy Hunter hang out at her house and hold her teddy bear, Cavendish, while he is recovering from the venom of the Manticore. Hunter later encounters Death walking in the rain in "The Books of Magic" #25, and there was later an arc about her in "". In "Hellblazer" #120, Death appears briefly in a pub filled with ghosts.
She also appeared in Mike Carey's "Lucifer" series when the eponymous main character was wounded and nearly died. Initially it appears that Death has actually arrived for Lucifer, but in fact she is there for Elaine Belloc who dies (temporarily) saving Lucifer's life. Death admits she's arrived a little early and takes the opportunity to talk to Lucifer who is currently trapped between life and death.
In "Madame Xanadu", the title character calls out to her while chained up and denied access to her youth potions during the French Revolution. As she is a survivor from the days of King Arthur, she grows very old very quickly without them. She summons Death and reads her own cards, interpreting her Death card as predictive of her future destiny on earth. Death is so amused by this interpretation that she grants Madame Xanadu immortality, revocable any time Xanadu wishes.
DC Universe.
Death has also made occasional appearances in the mainstream DC Universe. To the annoyance of Neil Gaiman, she appeared in "Captain Atom" #42-43 (June–July 1990), as merely "an aspect" of Death. Other Giffen stories that feature Death include "Ambush Bug Nothing Special" one-shot (Sep 1992), a cameo in the Lobo comic book "Lobo's Back" #3 (Oct. 1992), in which she slaps Lobo for getting fresh with her. She observes the destruction of the Earth in "Legion of Super-Heroes" vol. 4, #38 (Dec 1992). The character appeared in "Action Comics" #894, which was written by Paul Cornell. Cornell confirmed that Neil Gaiman has given his approval for the use of Death in the storyline. In the story, while searching for a black power ring, Lex Luthor encounters her. She appears again in issue #900 and in "The Flash" (vol. 3) #6, part of the "Brightest Day" crossover.
Quasi-canonical appearances.
In the AIDS-awareness eight-page comic "Death Talks About Life" by Gaiman and McKean (which was first included in various Vertigo titles, and later released as a stand-alone giveaway pamphlet), Death demonstrates safe sex by placing a condom on a banana held by John Constantine. Lightening the impact of the underlying message, she informs the reader that when one is through with the demonstration, "you can eat the banana." This was used in high school health classes and is also reprinted as an addendum to the "Death: The High Cost of Living" trade paperback.
This version of Death also made a cameo appearance in the crossover special "Avengers/JLA" #2. She is represented in the Grandmaster's home base, alongside Deadman, Hela and the purple-robed version of Death native to the Marvel Universe, which, as the plots of other crossover comics have hinged upon, exists in the same continuum of fictional universes as DC's. (Marvel's version of Death appears alternatively as a coldly beautiful woman in a purple robe or a walking skeleton (sometimes male and sometimes female in form, depending upon the context).
She made an appearance in the Marvel Universe, at the wedding of Rick Jones and Marlo Chandler in "The Incredible Hulk" #418 (handing Marlo a hair brush, a visual pun referring to Marlo's recent 'brush with death').
Non-canon references and appearances.
Death (not of the Endless) was also the narrator and host of "The Big Book of Death" (1995), a large format comic in the Ripley's Believe It Or Not "strange but true" genre which came out from Paradox Press, an imprint of DC.
"Death of the Endless" is referenced in the 2009 Young Adult novel, "The Suicide Club", by Rhys Thomas. In it, the lead character describes death returning with the sound of beating wings.
Death is referenced in Sam Keith's "The Maxx". "They're all necro-nerds and Sand freaks. They think death is romantic. Death is hard and cold and ugly, not some cute chick" as quoted by the character Sara.
In the television series "Roseanne," posters of Death are seen on Darlene's bedroom walls, and a small postcard of Death hung for a time on the family refrigerator. 
Death is also mentioned in Jorge Jaramillo's novel Vallecuervo (México, 2010). Úrsula, the main character, is looking for her brother. In an old attic she discovered he was living in, she finds an assortment of comic books: "While I was looking at that Love and Rockets TPB I sensed I was being watched. To my surprise it was Her. Yes, Her. Death. Of the Endless. The cute chick in black dress from Neil Gaiman's comics. She was there, standing still, looking right into my eyes. I moved forward, I touched Her face. Dust. I folded Her and took Her with me (along with those Rockets and some Rick Veitch's books."
The Virgin Books' New Adventures "Doctor Who" novel series introduced a manipulative and generally morally ambivalent female incarnation of Death (or rather, as later revealed, one of several Eternals masquerading as cosmic principles). In "Happy Endings" she quotes from the original "The Books of Magic" mini-series. Although the bulk of the novel was written by Paul Cornell, the section featuring Death was written by author Neil Penswick, as part of a chapter written in tandem by the authors of the previous 49 novels.

</doc>
<doc id="79845" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79845" title="Amarna">
Amarna

Amarna () is an extensive Egyptian archaeological site that represents the remains of the capital city newly established and built by the Pharaoh Akhenaten of the late Eighteenth Dynasty, and abandoned shortly after his death (1332 BC). The name for the city employed by the ancient Egyptians is written as Akhetaten (or Akhetaton—transliterations vary) in English transliteration. Akhetaten means "Horizon of the Aten".
The area is located on the east bank of the Nile River in the modern Egyptian province of Minya, some south of the city of al-Minya, south of the Egyptian capital Cairo and north of Luxor. The city of Deir Mawas lies directly west across from the site of Amarna. Amarna, on the east side, includes several modern villages, chief of which are el-Till in the north and el-Hagg Qandil in the south.
The area was also occupied during later Roman and early Christian times; excavations to the south of the city have found several structures from this period.
Name.
The name Amarna comes from the Beni Amran tribe that lived in the region and founded a few settlements. The ancient Egyptian name was Akhetaten.
City of Akhetaten.
The area of the city was effectively a virgin site, and it was in this city that the Akhetaten described as the Aten's
"seat of the First Occasion, which he had made for himself that he might rest in it."
It may be that the Royal Wadi's resemblance to the hieroglyph for "horizon" showed that this was the place to found the city.
The city was built as the new capital of the Pharaoh Akhenaten, dedicated to his new religion of worship to the Aten. Construction started in or around Year 5 of his reign (1346 BC) and was probably completed by Year 9 (1341 BC), although it became the capital city two years earlier. To speed up construction of the city most of the buildings were constructed out of mud-brick, and white washed. The most important buildings were faced with local stone.
It is the only ancient Egyptian city which preserves great details of its internal plan, in large part because the city was abandoned after the death of Akhenaten, when Akhenaten's son, King Tutankhamun, decided to leave the city and return to his birthplace in Thebes (modern Luxor). The city seems to have remained active for a decade or so after his death, and a shrine to Horemheb indicates that it was at least partially occupied at the beginning of his reign, if only as a source for building material elsewhere. Once it was abandoned it remained uninhabited until Roman settlement began along the edge of the Nile. However, due to the unique circumstances of its creation and abandonment, it is questionable how representative of ancient Egyptian cities it actually is. Akhetaten was hastily constructed and covered an area of approximately of territory on the east bank of the Nile River; on the west bank, land was set aside to provide crops for the city's population. The entire city was encircled with a total of 14 boundary stelae detailing Akhenaten's conditions for the establishment of this new capital city of Egypt.
The earliest dated stele from Akhenaten's new city is known to be "Boundary stele K" which is dated to Year 5, IV Peret (or month 8), day 13 of Akhenaten's reign. (Most of the original 14 boundary stelae have been badly eroded.) It preserves an account of Akhenaten's foundation of this city. The document records the pharaoh's wish to have several temples of the Aten to be erected here, for several royal tombs to be created in the eastern hills of Akhetaten for himself, his chief wife Nefertiti and his eldest daughter Meritaten as well as his explicit command that when he was dead, he would be brought back to Akhetaten for burial. Boundary stela K introduces a description of the events that were being celebrated at Akhetaten:
This text then goes on to state that Akhenaten made a great oblation to the god Aten "and this is the theme the occasion which is illustrated in the lunettes of the stelae where he stands with his queen and eldest daughter before an altar heaped with offerings under the Aten, while it shines upon him rejuvenating his body with its rays."
Site and plan.
Located on the east bank of the Nile, the ruins of the city are laid out roughly north to south along a "Royal Road", now referred to as "Sikhet es-Sultan". The Royal residences are generally to the north, in what is known as the North City, with a central administration and religious area and the south of the city is made up of residential suburbs..
North City.
If one approached the city of Amarna from the north by river the first buildings past the norther boundary stele would be the North Riverside Palace. This building ran all the way up to the waterfront and was likely the main residence of the Royal Family. Located within the North City area is the Northern Palace, the main residence of the Royal Family. Between this and the central city, the Northern Suburb was initially a prosperous area with large houses, but the house size decreased and became poorer the further from the road they were.
Central City.
Most of the important ceremonial and administrative buildings were located in the central city. Here the Great Temple of the Aten and the Small Aten Temple were used for religious functions and between these the Great Royal Palace and Royal Residence were the ceremonial residence of the King and Royal Family, and were linked by a bridge or ramp. Located behind the Royal Residence was the Bureau of Correspondence of Pharaoh, where the Amarna Letters were found.
This area was probably the first area to be completed, and had at least two phases of construction.
Southern suburbs.
To the south of the city was the area now referred to as the "Southern Suburbs". It contained the estates of many of the city's powerful nobles, including Nakhtpaaten (Chief Minister), Ranefer, Panehesy (High Priest of the Aten) and Ramose (Master of Horses). This area also held the studio of the sculptor Thutmose, where the famous bust of Nefertiti was found in 1912.
Further to the south of the city was Kom el-Nana, an enclosure, usually referred to as a "sun-shade", and was probably built as a sun-temple., and then the Maru-Aten, which was a palace or sun-temple originally thought to have been constructed for Akhenaten's queen Kiya, but on her death her name and images were altered to those of Meritaten, his daughter.
City outskirts.
Surrounding the city and marking its extent, the Boundary Stelae (each a rectangle of carved rock on the cliffs on both sides of the Nile) describing the founding of the city are a primary source of information about it.
Away from the city Akhenaten's Royal necropolis was started in a narrow valley to the east of the city, hidden in the cliffs. Only one tomb was completed, and was used by an unnamed Royal Wife, and Akhenaten's tomb was hastily used to hold him and likely Meketaten, his second daughter.
In the cliffs to the north and south of the Royal Wadi, the nobles of the city constructed their Tombs.
Life in ancient Amarna/Akhetaten.
Much of what is known about Amarna's founding is due to the preservation of a series of official boundary stelae (13 are known) ringing the perimeter of the city. These are cut into the cliffs on both sides of the Nile (10 on the east, 3 on the west) and record the events of Akhetaten (Amarna) from founding to just before its fall.
To make the move from Thebes to Amarna, Akhenaten needed the support of the military. Ay, one of Akhenaten's principal advisors, exercised great influence in this area because his father Yuya had been an important military leader. Additionally, everyone in the military had grown up together, they had been a part of the richest and most successful period in Egypt's history under Akhenaten's father, so loyalty among the ranks was strong and unwavering. Perhaps most importantly, "it was a military whose massed ranks the king took every opportunity to celebrate in temple reliefs, first at Thebes and later at Amarna."
Religious life.
While the reforms of Akhenaten are generally believed to have been oriented towards a sort of monotheism, this may be rather oversimplified. Archaeological evidence shows other deities were also worshipped, even at the centre of the Aten cult – if not officially, then at least by the people who lived and worked there.
..at Akhetaten itself, recent excavation by Kemp (2008: 41-46) has shown the presence of objects that depict gods, goddesses and symbols that belong to the traditional field of personal belief. So many examples of Bes, the grotesque dwarf figure who warded off evil spirits, have been found, as well as of the goddess-monster, Taweret, part crocodile, part hippopotamus, who was associated with childbirth. Also in the royal workmen’s village at Akhetaten, stelae dedicated to Isis and Shed have been discovered (Watterson 1984: 158 and 208).
Amarna art-style.
The Amarna art-style broke with long-established Egyptian conventions. Unlike the strict idealistic formalism of previous Egyptian art, it depicted its subjects more realistically. These included informal scenes, such as intimate portrayals of affection within the royal family or playing with their children, and no longer portrayed women as lighter coloured than men. The art also had a realism that sometimes borders on caricature.
While the worship of Aten was later referred to as the Amarna heresy and suppressed, this art had a more lasting legacy.
Rediscovery and excavation.
The first western mention of the city was made in 1714 by Claude Sicard, a French Jesuit priest who was travelling through the Nile Valley, and described the boundary stela from Amarna. As with much of Egypt, it was visited by Napoleon's "corps de savants" in 1798–1799, who prepared the first detailed map of Amarna, which was subsequently published in "Description de l'Égypte" between 1821 and 1830.
After this European exploration continued in 1824 when Sir John Gardiner Wilkinson explored and mapped the city remains. The copyist Robert Hay and his surveyor G. Laver visited the locality and uncovered several of the Southern Tombs from sand drifts, recording the reliefs in 1833. The copies made by Hay and Laver languish largely unpublished in the British Library, where an ongoing project to identify their locations is underway.
The Prussian expedition led by Richard Lepsius visited the site in 1843 and 1845, and recorded the visible monuments and topography of Amarna in two separate visits over a total of twelve days, using drawings and paper squeezes. The results were ultimately published in "Denkmäler aus Ägypten und Äthiopien" between 1849 to 1913, including an improved map of the city. Despite being somewhat limited in accuracy, the engraved "Denkmäler" plates formed the basis for scholastic knowledge and interpretation of many of the scenes and inscriptions in the private tombs and some of the Boundary Stelae for the rest of the century. The records made by these early explorers teams are of immense importance since many of these remains were later destroyed or otherwise lost.
In 1887 a local woman digging for "sebakh" uncovered a cache of over 300 cuneiform tablets (now commonly known as the Amarna Letters). These tablets recorded select diplomatic correspondence of the Pharaoh and were predominantly written in Akkadian, the "lingua franca" commonly used during the Late Bronze Age of the Ancient Near East for such communication. This discovery led to the recognition of the importance of the site, and lead to a further increase in exploration.
Between 1891 and 1892 Alessandro Barsanti 'discovered' and cleared the king's tomb (although it was probably known to the local population from about 1880). Around the same time Sir Flinders Petrie worked for one season at Amarna, working independently of the Egypt Exploration Fund. He excavated primarily in the Central City, investigating the Great Temple of the Aten, the Great Official Palace, the King's House, the Bureau of Correspondence of Pharaoh and several private houses. Although frequently amounting to little more than a sondage, Petrie's excavations revealed additional cuneiform tablets, the remains of several glass factories, and a great quantity of discarded faience, glass and ceramic in sifting the palace rubbish heaps (including Mycenaean sherds). By publishing his results and reconstructions rapidly, Petrie was able to stimulate further interest in the site's potential.
The copyist and artist Norman de Garis Davies published drawn and photographic descriptions of private tombs and boundary stelae from Amarna from 1903 to 1908. These books were republished by the EES in 2006.
In the early years of the 20th century (1907 to 1914) the Deutsche Orientgesellschaft expedition, led by Ludwig Borchardt, excavated extensively throughout the North and South suburbs of the city. The famous bust of Nefertiti, now in Berlin's Ägyptisches Museum, was discovered amongst other sculptural artefacts in the workshop of the sculptor Thutmose. The outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 terminated the German excavations.
From 1921 to 1936 an Egypt Exploration Society expedition returned to excavation at Amarna under the direction of T.E. Peet, Sir Leonard Woolley, Henri Frankfort, Stephen Glanville and John Pendlebury. The renewed investigations were focused on religious and royal structures.
During the 1960s the Egyptian Antiquities Organization (now the Egyptian Supreme Council of Antiquities) undertook a number of excavations at Amarna.
Exploration of the city continues to the present, currently under the direction of Barry Kemp (Reader in Egyptology, University of Cambridge, England) under the auspices of the Egypt Exploration Society. In 1980 a separate expedition led by Geoffrey Martin described and copied the reliefs from the Royal Tomb, later publishing its findings together with objects thought to have come from the tomb. This work was published in 2 volumes by the EES.
In 2007, the continuing EES exploration discovered a cemetery of private individuals, close to the southern tombs of the Nobles.

</doc>
<doc id="79847" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79847" title="Dream (comics)">
Dream (comics)

Dream is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics' imprint Vertigo. The character is the protagonist of the comic book series "The Sandman", written by Neil Gaiman. One of the seven Endless, inconceivably powerful beings older and greater than gods, Dream is both lord and personification of all dreams and stories, all that is not in reality (which, in turn, Dream may define by his existence). He has taken many names, including Morpheus and Oneiros, and his appearance can change depending on the person who is seeing him. Dream was named the sixth-greatest comic book character by "Empire Magazine". He was also named fifteenth in IGN's 100 Top Comic Book Heroes list.
Characteristics.
Appearance.
Morpheus usually appears as a tall, thin man with bone-white skin, black hair, and two stars in place of eyes. Most often they are silver, blue, or white, but when he becomes angered, they have been shown to turn red.
Morpheus' appearance ranges widely: People generally perceive him in a style of dress appropriate to their region and era. In the Dreaming, he is often seen wearing a grey T-shirt and dark pants. He appears to be light-skinned when interacting with similar characters, but the people of "Tales in the Sands primordial African city see him as dark. Morpheus appears as a huge black cat when speaking to the lonely cat-pilgrim of "Dream of a Thousand Cats" and as a cat-headed god when addressing the Egyptian feline goddess Bast. The Martian Manhunter sees Morpheus in the shape of a flaming Martian skull and identifies him as Lord L'Zoril; but Mister Miracle, looking at him simultaneously, sees Morpheus as a man. In ', he appears in the same form to all the Gods (Bast comments: "I much prefer you in cat form, Dream old friend"). In "", set in ancient Japan, Morpheus appears as a Japanese man to a Buddhist monk and as a fox to a fox spirit.
He customarily wears a billowing black cape, sometimes with a flame motif. In battle he wears a helm made from the skull and backbone of a defeated enemy. This helm, which resembles a World War II-era gas mask, is also his sigil in the galleries of the other Endless, as well as appearing in the dreams (and at least once on the staircase wall) of Wesley Dodds.
His face and physique is based on the amalgamation of Neil Gaiman in his twenties, The Cure's frontman Robert Smith and ballet dancer Farukh Ruzimatov. Dream's face and appearance is also based on Bauhaus frontman Peter Murphy. In fact, Gaiman explained that Murphy was the original model for Morpheus. Gaiman also stated that Sandman artist, Dave McKean, based Dream's face in the cover of Sandman #1 on Peter Murphy.
Speech.
Morpheus' speech is usually portrayed as white text in black, wavy-edged speech bubbles bordered in white. The text is capitalized normally (sentence case) in stark contrast to other characters' speech generally in block caps text.
Personality.
Although he is ultimately a heroic character, Dream is sometimes slow to understand humor, occasionally insensitive, often self-obsessed, and very slow to forgive a slight. He has a long history of failed amours, and is both shown and implied to have reacted harshly to the women therein. As Mervyn Pumpkinhead remarks: "He's gotta be the tragic figure standing out in the rain, mournin' the loss of his beloved. So down comes the rain, right on cue. In the meantime everybody gets dreams fulla existential angst and wakes up feeling like hell. And we all get wet". Near the end of the ' story arc, Desire says of Dream: "He's stuffy, stupid, and thinks he knows everything, and there's just something about him that gets on my nerves". There is a long-standing enmity between Morpheus and Desire, stemming from Desire's possible involvement in the failure of one of Dream's amours (seen in '). It is implied that before his imprisonment he was crueler and more blind to his flaws, and much of "The Sandman" is focused on Morpheus' desire to atone for his past behavior (e.g., helping past lovers Calliope and Nada). Morpheus has a great pride that does not tolerate damage, examples include banishing Nada to Hell for rejecting him and being angry at the notion made by Hob Gadling that he seeks companionship.
Morpheus is constantly aware of his responsibilities, both to other people and to his territory, and is detailed and exacting in their fulfillment (as noted in "Season of Mists", where Morpheus is described thus: "Of all the Endless, save perhaps Destiny, he is most conscious of his responsibilities, the most meticulous in their execution"). He shares a close, reciprocal bond of dependence and trust with his elder sister, Death. He consistently strives for understanding of himself and of the other Endless, but is ultimately defeated by his inability to accept change: in "", when asked (by Matthew, the raven), "Why did it happen? Why did he let it happen?", Lucien remarks: "Charitably... I think... sometimes, perhaps, one must change or die. And in the end, there were, perhaps, limits to how much he could let himself change.". However, Death suspects Dream allowed himself to become vulnerable to the Kindly Ones (by leaving his realm, when summoned by a fairy). This would imply Dream accepted change enough to knowingly and willingly allow himself to be killed and reborn as another aspect of himself - a different one. One might argue, however, that this whole "die and be replaced by the Daniel version of himself" plot was just Dream playing his own role, as he already knew some of it would happen, when he met the Daniel Dream and retrieved the Saeculum (both events happening in The Sandman Overture). Thus, change was maybe never an option, but an imperative.
Morpheus is noted in "Season of Mists" as "accumulating names to himself as others make friends, but he permits himself few friends". He is given more names in "The Sandman" than any of the other Endless, beyond the many translations of "Dream".
The Dreaming.
Morpheus lives in a castle at the heart of his realm, "the Dreaming". Both the castle and the rest of his realm are mutable and change often, often at Morpheus' will, although his resistance to change (and difficulty changing) is a theme throughout the series. Morpheus maintains both the castle and the realm, as with all aspects of his appearance, in a half-accommodating, half-terrifying state, simultaneously acknowledging both the courtesy due to others and the attention due him as the realm's master, and indeed the pleasantness and terror of dreams themselves.
Morpheus is the only one of the Endless known to populate his realm with speaking characters: a multitude of dreams and nightmares he has created, as well as entities from other realms. These include the narrators from older DC horror comics, including Cain and Abel, and Fiddler's Green, who emulates G. K. Chesterton in human form. Morpheus recruits or creates (or re-creates) servants to perform roles he could easily carry out himself, including the reorganization of the castle and the guarding of its entrance. Although this is not stated in the series, Gaiman has said that he "always assumed" Morpheus had once been alone in the Dreaming and that he populated it for want of company.
Other than Morpheus himself, the most important inhabitant of the Dreaming is Lucien, the first of Dream's ravens and now the Librarian of the Dreaming. Dream gives Lucien authority over the Dreaming on several occasions. The character originally appeared in the 1970s DC comic "Tales of Ghost Castle", which lasted for only three issues (and was apparently killed off in "Secrets of Haunted House" #44). Lucien and Cain have a similar appearance as both were originally created by the same artist.
Other notable inhabitants include:
Morpheus' realm at any moment is also full of all creatures dreaming at that moment, although these seldom appear in the comics panel. Several comics in DC's Vertigo line have been set in the Dreaming, most notably a series of the same name (chief author Alisa Kwitney).
Aspects of Dream.
The events of "The Kindly Ones" and "The Wake" reveal that Morpheus is only one aspect of the concept 'Dream of the Endless'. After his death, the human child Daniel Hall is transfigured into a new aspect of Dream: physically resembling Morpheus, but with white hair and predominantly white clothing.
One character at Morpheus' wake, perplexed by the question of who exactly has died, is told by Abel that the purpose of the wake is to mourn "a p-p-point of view". The new Dream instructs his followers to use the name "Morpheus" only for his predecessor.
Dream and mythology.
"The Sandman Special" #1 implies that Morpheus is the Greek deity of that name (in DC Comics continuity, another version of this god, clearly not Dream, appears in George Pérez' "Wonder Woman" #11 (December 1987) — what relation this figure, an old man dressed in purple vaguely resembling Agatha Harkness, has to this aspect of Dream is unclear). Morpheus is the father of Greek hero Orpheus by the muse Calliope, and once-patron of Aristeas of Marmora: thus taking the role given in legend to Apollo, with whom he is often confused.
In DC continuity.
Since the creation of the Vertigo imprint (itself largely inspired by the success of DC Comics' increasingly mature titles such as "Swamp Thing", "Watchmen", "Hellblazer", and "The Sandman"), DC's horror/occult characters such as Morpheus have drifted progressively further away both from DC continuity and from each other. Dream originally began as a mainstream DC character able to interact with DC superheroes, and Gaiman's versions of Dream have appeared in DC superhero titles written by Keith Giffen and by Grant Morrison, as well as in Gaiman's own "The Books of Magic" series and in a Rick Veitch-authored issue of "Swamp Thing" (where he meets Matthew Cable). Morpheus also appears briefly during Kevin Smith's run on "Green Arrow" in a flashback showing him in Alexander Burgess' basement, still imprisoned in Roderick Burgess' glass globe prison. He also appeared occasionally as the inspiration for the Golden Age Sandman (Wesley Dodds) in the pages of "Sandman Mystery Theatre".

</doc>
<doc id="79848" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79848" title="Bachelor Mother">
Bachelor Mother

Bachelor Mother (1939) is an American comedy film directed by Garson Kanin, and starring Ginger Rogers (in a mostly non-dancing and non-singing role), David Niven, and Charles Coburn. The screenplay was written by Norman Krasna based on an Academy Award nominated story by Felix Jackson (aka Felix Joachimson) written for the 1935 Austrian-Hungarian film "Little Mother". With a plot full of mistaken identities, "Bachelor Mother" is a light-hearted treatment of the otherwise serious issues of child abandonment.
It was remade in 1956 as "Bundle of Joy", starring Debbie Reynolds and Eddie Fisher.
This movie also inspired some Bollywood movies like Kunwara Baap .
Plot.
Polly Parrish (Ginger Rogers) is a salesgirl at the department store John B. Merlin and Son in New York City. Hired as temporary help for the Christmas season, she receives her dismissal notice as the season comes to a close. During her lunch break, she sees a stranger leaving a baby on the steps of an orphanage. Fearing the baby will roll down the steps, Polly picks it up. An attendant opens the door and mistakenly believes that Polly is the baby's mother. 
David Merlin (David Niven), the playboy son of the store's owner J.B. Merlin (Charles Coburn), is sympathetic to the "unwed mother" and arranges for her to get her job back. Mrs. Weiss (Ferike Boros), Polly's landlady, offers to take care of the boy when Polly is at work. Unable to convince anyone that she is not the mother, and threatened by David with loss of her job if she doesn't assume that role, Polly gives up and starts raising the child.
David's involvement with Polly gradually turns into love, but he keeps the relationship a secret from his father, fearing his reaction. When he finds that New Year's Eve has arrived and he has no date, David turns to Polly. He orders clothes to be sent from the store and takes her to a party. Although David is falling for Polly, he does not relish the idea of a "ready-made family". 
When J.B. learns about the child, he assumes that David is the father. His suspicions are reinforced when, in a bit of bad timing, Polly and David each produce a different man whom they claim is the father. To his son's surprise, J.B. is delighted (he had been impatiently waiting for David to settle down and provide him with a grandson). In the end, David decides that he is in love with Polly and baby John. He tells his father that he is the father of the child and plans to marry Polly, all the while believing Polly is the child's mother.
Production.
Louis Hayward was originally announced as the male lead.
Reception.
The film was a big hit and earned RKO a profit of $827,000.
Adaptations to other media.
"Bachelor Mother" was adapted as a radio play on several occasions, including five broadcasts of "The Screen Guild Theater": the first starred Laraine Day, Henry Fonda and Charles Coburn (February 1, 1942); the second starred Ann Sothern and Fred MacMurray (November 23, 1942); the third starred Ginger Rogers, Francis X. Bushman and David Niven (May 6, 1946); the fourth starred Lucille Ball, Joseph Cotten and Charles Coburn (April 28, 1949); the fifth starred Ann Sothern and Robert Stack (April 20, 1952). It was also adapted as an hour-long play on "Lux Radio Theater" with Ginger Rogers and Fredric March (January 22, 1940) and on "Screen Director's Playhouse" with Lucille Ball and Robert Cummings (March 8, 1951).

</doc>
<doc id="79849" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79849" title="Touraine">
Touraine

The Touraine () is one of the traditional provinces of France. Its capital was Tours. During the political reorganization of French territory in 1790, the Touraine was divided between the departments of Indre-et-Loire, :Loir-et-Cher and Indre.
Geography.
Traversed by the Loire and its tributaries the Cher, the Indre and the Vienne, the Touraine makes up a part of the Paris Basin. It is well known for its viticulture. The TGV, which connects Tours with Paris in just over an hour, has made the Touraine a place of residence for people who work in the capital but seek a different quality of life.
History.
The Touraine takes its name from a Celtic tribe called the Turones, who inhabited the region about two thousand years ago. 
In 1044, the control of Touraine was given to the Angevins, who (as the House of Plantagenet) became kings of England in 1154, the castle of Chinon being their greatest stronghold. In 1205, Philip II Augustus of France regained Touraine. At this time, Touraine was made into a royal duchy. In 1429, Saint Joan of Arc had a historic meeting with the future King of France Charles VII at Chinon. Throughout the late 15th and 16th centuries, Touraine was a favorite residence of French kings, and the dark and gloomy castles were converted to Renaissance châteaux; for this reason the region was titled "The Garden of France". These same châteaux became popular tourist attractions in modern times. The royal duchy became a province in 1584, and was divided into departments in 1790.
Sights.
The Touraine is celebrated for its many châteaux: examples are those at Amboise, Azay-le-Rideau, Chenonceaux, Chinon, Langeais, Loches and Villandry.
External links.
Official website: Touraine Tourism Board

</doc>
<doc id="79851" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79851" title="Safe, sane and consensual">
Safe, sane and consensual

In the BDSM community, safe, sane and consensual (SSC) are common principles guiding relationships and activities.
The principles are that BDSM activities should be:
Other people in the BDSM community do not consider SSC to be an accurate term for these relationships or activities. The term Risk Aware Consensual Kink (RACK) is sometimes used as a substitute description. Disagreements generally arise from the subjective nature of each term in SSC when using the term as a yardstick to evaluate activities. It can be argued that the terms in RACK are equally subjective. "How safe is safe enough?" is a legitimate question, as is "How aware is aware enough?".
Most attribute the term SSC to David Stein, who coined it in August 1983 for In his essay entitled "[http://boybear.us/ssc.pdf Safe Sane Consensual: The Evolution of a Shibboleth", Stein states that the term was created "to distinguish the kind of S/M I wanted to do from the criminally abusive or neurotically self-destructive behaviour popularly associated with the term 'sadomasochism'."

</doc>
<doc id="79860" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79860" title="Bondage pornography">
Bondage pornography

Bondage pornography is a fetishism that involves photographs, stories, movies, or drawings that contains depictions of sexual bondage or other BDSM activities.
Detective magazines, comic books and early fetish magazines.
In the early 20th century, bondage imagery was available through "detective magazines", and comic books often featured characters being tied up or tying others up, particularly in "damsel in distress" plots.
There were also a number of dedicated fetish magazines which featured images of fetishism and bondage. The first of such magazines in the United States was "Bizarre", first published in 1946 by fetish photographer John Willie (the phallic pseudonym of John Coutts), who developed the concept in the 1920s. Willie was able to avoid controversy in censorship through careful attention to guidelines and the use of humor. Publication of "Bizarre" was suspended completely from 1947 to 1951 because of post-War paper shortages. By 1956 Willie was ready to give up the magazine, and in that year he sold it to someone described only as R.E.B., who published six more issues before "Bizarre" finally folded in 1959. 
Willie is better remembered for his "Sweet Gwendoline" comic strips, in which Gwendoline is drawn as a rather naïve blonde damsel in distress, with ample curves, who is unfortunate enough to find herself tied up in scene after scene by the raven-haired dominatrix and the moustachioed villain "Sir Dystic D'Arcy". She is rescued and also repeatedly tied up (though for benevolent reasons) by secret agent U-69 (censored to U89 in some editions). The comic strips were published largely in the 1950s and 60s. The story was published as a piecemeal serial, appearing usually two pages at a time in several different magazines over the years.
Though "Bizarre" was a small format magazine, it had a huge impact on later kink publications, such as ENEG's fetish magazine, "Exotique", published 1956-1959. "Exotique" was entirely devoted to fetish fashions and female-dominant bondage fantasies. The 36 issues featured photos and illustrations of dominatrix-inspired vamps (including Burtman's wife Tana Louise and iconic model Bettie Page) wearing exotic leather and rubber ensembles, corsets, stockings/garters, boots, and high heels. Gene Bilbrew contributed illustrations to the magazine. The articles, many written by Leonard Burtman, using an alias, covered various aspects of sadomasochism and transvestism, with men depicted as slaves to imperious, all-powerful women. "Exotique" had no nudity, pornographic content, or even sexually suggestive situations. Nevertheless, much like fellow publisher Irving Klaw, in 1957, Burtman would be targeted as a pornographer. He was relentlessly pursued by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service (acting as a censorship agency under the Comstock laws) and local law enforcement (who functioned in coordination with Postal Inspectors and the Catholic Church). Eventually, he was arrested, his magazines and materials confiscated, and brought to trial. This led to the demise of the magazine in 1959. However, starting in 1960, Burtman (under a different imprint) would go on to publish many more fetish magazines that were nearly identical to "Exotique" such as "New Exotique", "Masque", "Connoisseur", "Bizarre Life", "High Heels", "Unique World", "Corporal" (a pioneering spanking-fetish magazine) and others well into the 1970s.
New York photographer Irving Klaw also published illustrated adventure/bondage serials by fetish artists Eric Stanton, Gene Bilbrew, Adolfo Ruiz and others. Klaw is best known for operating an international mail-order business selling photographs and film of attractive women (sometimes in bondage) from the 1940s to the 1960s. His most famous bondage model was Bettie Page, who became the first celebrity of bondage film and photography.
These publications disappeared for a time with a crackdown on pornography in the late 1950s.
Bondage magazines return.
Dedicated bondage magazines again became popular in America in the 1970s. Publishers of bondage magazines included Harmony Concepts, the House of Milan and Lyndon Distributors. House of Milan have since been purchased by Lyndon Distributors.
These magazines were not generally available through mainstream distributors, and were sold either in sex shops or by mail order. They contained little advertising content, and were entirely dependent on sales.
Typically, each magazine consisted of several multi-page pictorials of tied-up women, often with a fictional narrative attached, and one fictional story of three or four pages in length. Sometimes pictorials were replaced by artwork by a fetish artist and/or included an interview with one of the performers in the industry. In the case of House of Milan and Lyndon Distributors, the magazines were simply illustrated text versions of videos published by the same title. Such practice cut costs and allowed a streamlined output of material.
Another type of magazine was the "compendium magazine", usually consisting of a large number of individual photographs drawn from previous magazines, without any linking story.
Because of their relatively small circulation, compared with mainstream pornography, most bondage magazines were printed in black and white, except for the cover and centerfold. In the 1980s and 1990s, experiments were made with adding more color content, but most magazine content remained black and white.
The attitude of some the early magazines could be regarded as misogynistic, in spite of editorial disclaimers that the magazines represented only fantasies, as the storylines deviated from the old-fashioned "damsel in distress" motif towards more restrictive and explicit BDSM practices. However, in reality the opposite effect often happened: as a bondage performer was cast in more material and engaged in more acts, she would often develop a stronger fan base and became a recognized star in her own right. Nikki Dial and Ashley Renee are two examples of performers who won awards for their work as subs in bondage videos, and typically endured the most punishment.
In the 1990s, as homosexuality and bi-sexuality began to be more socially acceptable, magazine publishers started to produce femdom material depicting men in bondage, as well as portraying female models as participants in mutually satisfying bondage games, usually with at least one actress performing as a dom and at least one as a sub. Sometimes, the roles of dom and sub would be reversed. Be Be LeBadd and Alexis Payne are two professional dominatrices who also found themselves on the receiving end of a whip from time to time.
Bondage websites and bondage imagery in mainstream pornography.
As the Internet becomes more widely available to deliver pornographic material, the bondage magazine market began to decrease. As of 2003, specialist bondage magazines were mostly displaced by bondage material on the Internet, and the presence of bondage imagery in mainstream pornographic magazines such as "Nugget" and Hustler's "Taboo" magazine.
However, the tradition of bondage magazines continues in the form of "art books" of bondage photographs, published by mainstream publishers such as Taschen.
Certain websites have begun providing bondage videos and photographs featuring the kidnapping roleplay, which has been largely the hallmark of 'detective' style bondage magazines. These styles are much closer to the style of bondage scenes in mainstream television.

</doc>
<doc id="79861" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79861" title="Constant term">
Constant term

In mathematics, a constant term is a term in an algebraic expression that has a value that is constant or cannot change, because it does not contain any modifiable variables. For example, in the quadratic polynomial
the 3 is a constant term.
After like terms are combined, an algebraic expression will have at most one constant term. Thus, it is common to speak of the quadratic polynomial
where "x" is the variable, and has a constant term of "c". If "c" = 0, then the constant term will not actually appear when the quadratic is written.
It is notable that a term that is constant, with a constant as a multiplicative coefficient added to it (although this expression could be more simply written as their product), still constitutes a constant term as a variable is still not present in the new term. Although the expression is modified, the term (and coefficient) itself classifies as constant. However, should this introduced coefficient contain a variable, while the original number has a constant meaning, this has no bearing if the new term stays constant as the introduced coefficient will always override the constant expression - for example, in formula_3 when x is multiplied by 2, the result, 2x, is not constant; while 1 * -2 is -2 and still a constant.
Any polynomial written in standard form has a unique constant term, which can be considered a coefficient of "x"0. In particular, the constant term will always be the lowest degree term of the polynomial. This also applies to multivariate polynomials. For example, the polynomial
has a constant term of −4, which can be considered to be the coefficient of "x"0"y"0, where the variables are eliminated by being exponentiated to 0 (any number exponentiated to 0 becomes 1). For any polynomial, the constant term can be obtained by substituting in 0 instead of each variable; thus, eliminating each variable. The concept of exponentiation to 0 can be extended to power series and other types of series, for example in this power series:
"a"0 is the constant term. In general a constant term is one that does not involve any variables at all. However in expressions that involve terms with other types of factors than constants and powers of variables, the notion of constant term cannot be used in this sense, since that would lead to calling "4" the constant term of formula_6, whereas substituting 0 for "x" in this polynomial makes it evaluate to 13.

</doc>
<doc id="79863" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79863" title="John Willie">
John Willie

John Alexander Scott Coutts (9 December 1902 – 5 August 1962), better known by the pseudonym John Willie, was the artist, fetish photographer, editor, and publisher of the soft-porn cult magazine "Bizarre." Willie is best known for his bondage comic strips, specifically "Sweet Gwendoline", featuring the villain Sir Dystic d'Arcy. Coutts was able to avoid controversy in censorship through careful attention to guidelines and the use of humor. Though "Bizarre" was a small format magazine, it had a huge impact on later kink publications and experienced a resurgence in popularity along with well-known fetish model, Bettie Page, in the 1980s.
Early life.
John Coutts was born in 1902 to a British family in Singapore, but moved with his family to England in 1903, where he grew up during the Edwardian era. It has been suggested that the restrictive fashions worn by women of that time, such as whale-bone corsets, and the constant repression of sex and sexual desire characteristic of this era, may "go some distance to explain fluency in the semiotics of dress." He is said to have had a rather typical upbringing in a middle-class family and attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Although he was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant into the Royal Scots, Coutts was forced to resign in 1925 when he married a night-club hostess, Eveline Fisher, without the permission of his commanding officer. He migrated with his wife to Australia, where their marriage ended in divorce in 1930.
Early career.
After moving to Brisbane, Australia, in 1926, Coutts was able to put his affinity for fetish wear to use when he joined the High Heel Club, where he was probably introduced to the print media of a community of "shoe lovers" and other fetishists. He met his future second wife, Holly Anna Faram, sometime in the early 1930s, and the couple married in 1942. She became his muse and modelled for him often. When one compares Willie’s drawings and photographs of his wife, one is left with the impression that Faram incorporated his ideal body type, tall and slender, and she is said to have shared the artist’s interest in bondage and high heels.
Because of his access to the High Heel Club’s mailing list, Willie was able to begin producing and selling his own illustrations and photography. He worked at a variety of jobs as well as pursuing his hobby and eventually established a company to produce exotic footwear, called "Achilles". In 1945, Willie moved to North America, while Holly chose to remain in Australia, where she died in 1983 at the age of 70. Willie hoped to settle in New York but was forced to remain in Montreal, Canada, for a year or so because of immigration issues.
John Willie's Work and "Bizarre".
"Bizarre" magazine began in 1946, while Coutts was living in Canada. He published the magazine under the phallic pseudonym of "John Willie" a name he kept for the duration of his career as publisher of the magazine. Willie also worked with Irving Klaw, the infamous BDSM photographer who was tried in New York for obscenity in 1955, and many other girlie magazines, but he is best known for his character Sweet Gwendoline, which he drew in a clear, anatomically correct style that influenced later artists such as ENEG and Eric Stanton. Other characters include "U69" (censored to U89 in some editions), the raven-haired dominatrix who ties up Gwendoline, and "Sir Dystic d'Arcy", the only prominent male character and probably a parody of Willie himself. "Sweet Gwendoline" was published as a serial in Robert Harrison's mainstream girlie magazine "Wink" from June 1947 to February 1950.
"Bizarre" was published, at somewhat irregular intervals, from 1946 to 1959 (compare with ENEG's work in "Exotique" magazine, published 1956-59). The magazine included many photographs, often of Willie's wife, and drawings of costume designs, some based on ideas from readers. There were also many letters from readers; he was accused of inventing these but insisted that they were genuine. The letters covered interests such as high heels, bondage, amputee fetishism, sadomasochism, transvestism, corsets, and body modification. "Bizarre" is known for its gender-bending nature and included editorials from men such as R. W., who wrote in issue no. 13: "Dear Sir:... Since my wife has been reading Bizarre she has realized my interests are not so strange and that others do likewise. Thanks to you Mr. Editor I can now dress as I please on occasion. As a corset lover this means high heels and real original wasp waisted corsets laced to give a five or six inch reduction in waist measure. I have been collecting these for some time."
Willie was very careful always to portray gender-bending and male-to-female as well as female-male transvestitism as heteronormative, ignoring the idea that many suggested which was the link from homosexuality to subverting gender norms. This also allows Willie to be credited with transgressing against the traditional understanding of the male gaze, where man looks upon woman and woman acts as an object upon which to be gazed. Although the figures in the magazine were most often female-bodied, it is never clear that the intended audience is male. In fact, because of the "bizarre" nature of the magazine, the intended audience was understood as female, male, intersex, or any in-between. Further subverting the idea that the magazine was produced specifically for men is the fact that in every single image of bondage where a woman is being tied up, it is another woman who is doing the tying. According to Julia Pine, this could allude to lesbian play and was "intended for the titillation of both male and female." Coutts was very attentive to satisfying all readers of his work and often wrote editorials on the subject.
The magazine was suspended completely from 1947 to 1951 because of paper shortages and other lasting effects of the Second World War. By 1956 Coutts was ready to give up the magazine, and that year he sold it to someone described only as R.E.B., who published six more issues before "Bizarre" finally folded in 1959. There was no mention within the magazine that it had changed hands, but in issue 23 Mahlon Blaine was introduced by the editor as the artist who was to replace Willie as the primary illustrator.
After publishing the first 23 issues of "Bizarre", Coutts moved to Hollywood, California, where in 1961 he developed a brain tumor and was forced to stop his mail-order business. He destroyed his archives and returned home to England, where he died in his sleep in August 1962.
Willie was portrayed by Jared Harris in the movie "The Notorious Bettie Page" (2006), which featured a fictional meeting between Willie and Page.
G-string tie.
The g-string tie method of bondage was popularised by John Willie. He regarded it as exceptionally difficult to escape from, claiming that even Harry Houdini did not like trying to escape from it. His published description is available online.
Controversy and censorship.
Despite the pornographic nature of the magazine, Coutts was able to circumvent censorship and orders to cease publication because he was careful to avoid "nudity, homosexuality, overt violence, or obvious depictions of things that might be read as perverse or immoral and that might rankle those parties who were capable of banning, censoring, or blocking circulation."
Quotations.
"Unless a model is a good actress, and has 'that type' of face, it's difficult for her to look sad and miserable when working for me. My studio is a pretty cheerful place, and quite unlike the atmosphere that surrounds Gwendoline when the Countess gets hold of her." 
"Bizarre. The magazine for pleasant optimists who frown on convention. The magazine of fashions and fantasies fantastic! Innumerable journals deal with ideas for the majority. Must all sheeplike follow in their wake? Bizarre is for those who have the courage of their own convictions. Conservative? —Old fashioned? —Not by any means! Where does a complete circle begin or end? And doesn't fashion move in a circle? Futuristic? Not even that—there is nothing new in fashion, it is only for the application of new materials—new ornaments—a new process of making—coupled with the taste and ability to create the unusual and unorthodox to the trend of the moment."
“As for sex, ignorance is abysmal, because for centuries those who could not satisfy themselves, except by denying pleasure to others, have taught generation after generation that "sex is taboo." Thou shalt not think about it or discuss it. In fact, it's a dreadful thing, but it's all right as long as you don't enjoy it. If you have any other ideas on the subject, you are a pervert.
The basis of a decent society is a happy home. Marriages break up almost invariably because of sex. What you do, or do not do, is your own business, all that matters is that the enjoyment be mutual,—and the time to discuss these things is before you get hitched up. There is a partner to suit everyone somewhere, but the search will be difficult until we can discuss our likes and dislikes, openly, in good taste, without threat from our own brand of standardized Police State.”

</doc>
<doc id="79868" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79868" title="Robert Bishop (artist)">
Robert Bishop (artist)

Robert K. Bishop (1945–1991) was an American bondage artist, often credited as The Bishop or simply Bishop. Born in Michigan, he has been compared with John Willie and described as the "Rembrandt of bondage art".
Most of Bishop's art appeared in magazines and catalogues from 1971 to the 1980s. By the mid-1990s, Bishop's art had long been out of print. The originals had largely been lost or destroyed. Even a partial reprinting in 1992–1993 was based on previously published copies.
Hunter Rose, in 1995 to 1996, made scans from his own personal magazine collection and materials loaned to him by many others. His set of 1254 images, which are believed to be the complete collection of all available Bishop art, were regularly posted to usenet newsgroups so that Bishop's work could be preserved and appreciated.
Work.
Bishop's work has been published extensively in bondage magazines, especially those of Centurions Publications, Harmony Concepts Inc. and the bondage publisher House of Milan. His work was known for being very detailed and vivid.
His main theme was extremely tight and/or reinforced bondage that showed its subjects straining against their restraints. The bondage depicted often involved elaborate harnesses and gags designed by Bishop.
Although almost all of his work depicted women in bondage, he also produced some series of female dominant images, and a few male bondage images, some of which are now displayed at the Leather Archives and Museum in Chicago.
Bishop also produced the "Fanni Hall" series of damsel-in-distress bondage comics.
In addition to his many illustrations in bondage magazines, his art was showcased in a number of dedicated magazines published by House of Milan and Lyndon Distributors Limited.
Techniques.
Bishop's illustrations were mostly in black and white using pen and ink, with spot use of airbrushing for shading. His work makes much play with the contrast between pale skin and black restraints and latex garments, and with the use of shading to imply shiny rubber textures and musculature. His colour illustrations were mostly for magazine covers, due to the economic constraints of bondage magazine production. He also drew in a softer pencil style, with subtle use of pencil shading. Materials for original works included pencil on vellum and inks on illustration board.
Death and legacy.
He committed suicide at the age of 46. His work has been extensively circulated on the Internet, and originals of his pictures are now collectors' items.

</doc>
<doc id="79873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79873" title="Dutch government-in-exile">
Dutch government-in-exile

The Dutch government in exile (), also known as the London Cabinet () was the government in exile of the Netherlands, headed by Queen Wilhelmina, that evacuated to London after the German invasion of the country during World War II.
Background and exile.
Prior to 1940, the Netherlands was a neutral country, generally on good terms with Germany. In May 1940 Queen Wilhelmina escaped to London; the Dutch government under Prime Minister De Geer would follow a day later, after the German invasion. The government was established at Stratton House in the Piccadilly area of London, opposite Green Park. Initially their hope was that France would regroup and liberate the country. Although there was an attempt in this direction, it soon failed, because the Allied forces were surrounded and forced to evacuate at Dunkirk.
The government-in-exile was soon faced with a dilemma. After France had been defeated, the Vichy French government came to power, which collaborated with Hitler. This led to a conflict between De Geer and the Queen. De Geer wanted to return to the Netherlands and collaborate as well. The government in exile was still in control of the Dutch East Indies with all its resources: it was the third largest oil producer at the time (after the US and the USSR). Wilhelmina realised that if the Dutch collaborated with Germany, the Dutch East Indies would be surrendered to Japan, as French Indochina was surrendered later by orders of the Vichy government.
Exile in London.
Because the Netherlands' hope for liberation was now the entry of the US or the USSR into the war, the Queen dismissed her prime minister, De Geer, and replaced him with Pieter Sjoerds Gerbrandy, who worked with Churchill and Roosevelt on ways to smooth the path for an American entry. Aruba and Curaçao, the then-world-class exporting oil refineries, were the main suppliers of refined products to the Allies. Aruba became a British protectorate from 1940 to 1942 and a US protectorate from 1942 to 1945. On November 23, 1941, under an agreement with the Netherlands government-in-exile, the United States occupied Dutch Guiana to protect the bauxite mines. An oil boycott was imposed on Japan, which helped to spark the Pearl Harbor attack. 
In September 1944, the Dutch, Belgian and Luxembourgish governments in exile began formulating an agreement over the creation of a Benelux Customs Union. The agreement was signed in the London Customs Convention on 5 September 1944.
The Queen's unusual action was later ratified by the Dutch parliament in 1946. Churchill called her "the only man in the Dutch government".

</doc>
<doc id="79874" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79874" title="Carloman I">
Carloman I

Carloman I (28 June 751 – 4 December 771) was king of the Franks from 768 until his death in 771. He was the second surviving son of Pepin the Short and Bertrada of Laon and was a younger brother of Charlemagne. Little is known of him, except such as touches upon his more famous father and brother. Carloman is mainly regarded by historians as Charlemagne's first steps towards acquiring the Holy Roman Empire, as his death allowed Charlemagne to take all of Francia and begin his expansion into other kingdoms.
Split of the Frankish kingdom.
At the age of 3, he was, together with his father, Pepin the Short, and his elder brother, Charlemagne, anointed King of the Franks and titled "Patrician of the Romans" by Pope Stephen II, who had left Rome to beg the Frankish King for assistance against the Lombards. Carloman and Charlemagne each inherited a half of the Kingdom of the Franks upon Pepin's death. His share was based in the centre of the Frankish Kingdom, with his capital at Soissons, and consisted of the Parisian basin, the Massif Central, the Languedoc, Provence, Burgundy, southern Austrasia, Alsace and Alemannia; the regions were poorly integrated and surrounded by those bequeathed to Charlemagne, and, although Carloman's territories were easier to defend than those of Charlemagne, they were also poorer in income.
It is commonly agreed that Carloman and Charlemagne disliked each other, although the reasons behind this are unclear: some historians suggest that each brother considered himself rightfully to be the sole heir of their father – Charlemagne as the elder child, Carloman as the legitimate child (Charlemagne is sometimes claimed to have been born a bastard in 742, a claim not always accepted). Be that as it may, Pepin the Short's disposal of his kingdom appears to have exacerbated the bad relations between the pair, since it required co-operation between the pair and left both feeling cheated. 
Competition with Charlemagne.
Carloman's reign proved short and troublesome. The brothers shared possession of Aquitaine, which broke into rebellion upon the death of Pepin the Short; when Charlemagne in 769 led an army into Aquitaine to put down the revolt, Carloman led his own army there to assist, before quarrelling with his brother at Moncontour, near Poitiers, and withdrawing, troops and all. This, it had been suggested, was an attempt to undermine Charlemagne's power, since the rebellion threatened the latter's rule; Charlemagne, however, crushed the rebels, whilst Carloman's behaviour had simply damaged his own standing amongst the Franks. Relations between the two then degenerated further, requiring the mediation of their mother, Bertrada, who appears to have favoured Charlemagne, with whom she would live out her widowhood, over Carloman.
In 770, his mother Bertrada began implementing her great strategy. After spending the Easter with Charlemagne at Liege, she visited Carloman at Seltz: her motives for visiting him are unknown, although it is suggested that she was trying to allay his fears of his brother, or persuade him to be more co-operative with Charlemagne, or even secure his agreement and collusion in her plans. However it was, by the end of the year Bertrada and Charlemagne had successfully encircled Carloman: Charlemagne had married Desiderata, the daughter of the Lombard king Desiderius, Carloman's immediate eastern neighbor, and the marriage created an alliance between Charlemagne and the Lombards; Bertrada had also secured for Charlemagne the friendship of Tassilo, Duke of Bavaria, her husband's nephew; she had even attempted to secure Papal support for the marriage by arranging for Desiderius to cede to Rome certain territories to which the Papacy laid claim, although Pope Stephen III remained in theory hostile to an alliance between his allies the Franks and his enemies the Lombards, and in reality deeply conflicted between the threat the Lombards posed to him and the chance to dispose of the anti-Lombard Christopher the "Primicerius", the dominant figure at the Papal court.
These maneuvers had been favorable to the Franks in general, but posed a serious threat to Carloman's position. He had been left without allies: he attempted to use his brother's alliance with the Lombards to his own advantage in Rome, offering his support against the Lombards to Stephen III and entering into secret negotiations with the "Primicerius", Christopher, whose position had also been left seriously isolated by the Franco-Lombard "rapprochement"; but after the violent murder of Christopher by Desiderius, Stephen III chose to give his support to the Lombards and Charlemagne. Carloman's position was rescued, however, by Charlemagne's sudden repudiation of his Lombard wife, Desiderius' daughter. Desiderius, outraged and humiliated, appears to have made some sort of alliance with Carloman following this, in opposition to Charlemagne and the Papacy, which took the opportunity to declare itself against the Lombards.
Death and legacy.
Carloman died on 4 December 771, at the Villa of Samoussy; the death, sudden and convenient though it was, was set down to natural causes (a severe nosebleed is sometimes claimed as being at fault). At the time of his death, he and his brother Charlemagne were close to outright war, which Charlemagne's biographer Einhard attributes to the miscounsel of Carloman's advisors. Carloman was buried in Reims, but he was reburied in the Basilique Saint-Denis in the 13th century.
Carloman had married a beautiful Frankish woman, Gerberga, who according to Pope Stephen III was chosen for him, together with Charlemagne's concubine, Himiltrude, by Pepin the Short. With Gerberga he had two sons, the older of whom was named Pepin after his grandfather, marking him according to Carolingian tradition as the heir of Carloman, and of Pepin the Short. After Carloman's death, Gerberga expected her elder son to become King, and for herself to rule as his regent; however, Carloman's former supporters – his cousin Adalhard, Abbot Fulrad of Saint Denis and Count Warin – turned against her, and invited Charlemagne to annex Carloman's territory, which he duly did. Gerberga then fled ("for no reason at all") with her sons and Count Autchar, one of Carloman's faithful nobles, to the court of Desiderius, who demanded of the new Pope Hadrian I that he anoint Carloman's sons as Kings of the Franks. Gerberga's flight ultimately precipitated Charlemagne's destruction of the Kingdom of the Lombards; he responded to Desiderius' support of Carloman's children, which threatened Charlemagne's own position, by sweeping into Italy and subjugating it. Desiderius and his family were captured, tonsured, and sent to Frankish religious houses; the fate of Gerberga and her children by Carloman is unknown, although it is possible that they, too, were sent by Charlemagne to monasteries and nunneries.
Despite their difficult relationship, and the events following Carloman's death, Charlemagne would later name his second legitimate son 'Carloman' after his deceased brother. This had, perhaps, been a public gesture to honour the memory of the boy's uncle, and to quell any rumours about Charlemagne's treatment of his nephews. If so, it was swept away in 781, when Charlemagne had his son renamed as Pepin.
Family.
He had several children with Gerberga.

</doc>
<doc id="79876" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79876" title="The Spitfire Boys">
The Spitfire Boys

The Spitfire Boys were the first Liverpool punk band to release a single ("British Refugee" c/w "Mein Kampf"). The Spitfire Boys were mainly notable for including in their line-up Peter Clarke, who went on to drum for The Slits and later Siouxsie and the Banshees (as well as marrying Siouxsie of the Banshees) as Budgie, and Paul Rutherford, later better known for being a member of 1980s pop band Frankie Goes to Hollywood. Jones (aka guitarist David Littler) went on to join The Photons, which also included Steve Strange (Visage) and Vince Ely (The Psychedelic Furs).
History.
Liverpool era.
In early 1977, David Littler saw The Heartbreakers live at Eric's Club, in Liverpool, and asked them about a band he had, but really didn't exist, and the group gave him a place to support them alongside Slaughter and the Dogs and Buzzcocks at Warrington Parr Hall, Warrington, Cheshire, in May. The band was formed shortly afterwards by Littler as guitarist, alongside his friends, bassist Peter Griffiths and lead vocalist Michael Rigby, and Steve Platt a drummer, A short time later, while preparing for the gig, the band changed their name to The Spitfire Boys as a suggestion of Wayne County. For their first gig at Warrington Parr Hall, they played covers of Ramones.
After their debut gig, the band had their first drummer, Peter Clarke, then an art student and member of Albert Dock, later Yachts. With that new line-up, the band played their second gig at Eric's Club. After that, the group sacked off Michael Rigby, who was replaced, as suggestion of Clarke, by Paul Rutherford.
They released their first single, "British Refugee" 7", on 7 October 1977, on RKO Records.
During the brief era of that line-up, they toured UK. They also supported The Prefects and The Slits (later Clarke's band), and also played a gig with Holly Johnson.
In December, Pete Wylie (formerly of Crucial Three and The Mystery Girls) joined the band, but only for a few rehearsals. On 22 December 1977, the band split up, Clarke, Griffiths and Wylie formed The Nova Mob (along Julian Cope), and Paul Rutherford formed The Opium Eaters, while Littler moved to London in January 1978, where joined The Photons, alongside Steve Strange (later Visage). Griffiths joined turned his back on the entire music scene, citing the growing trend in drug abuse, and general disillusionment as his reasons.
In July 2006 the band had "British Refugee" re-released on a Korova Records compilation album, entitled "North by Northwest", which was compiled by Paul Morley.
Wales era.
After Littler disbanded the short-lived Photons, he moved to Cardiff, Wales, in October 1978, where he formed a band, The White Boys, but changed their name to The Spitfire Boys, as pressure by a financer of the band, who thought the name would sell better. That time, the line-up was formed by Littler (as David Francis) on vocals and guitar, and former Nylonz members Peter Millman on guitar, Kurt Prasser on bass and Chris Brazier on drums. That alineation recorded and released the 7" single, "Funtime" in 1979. In October 1979, the band moved to London, where they recorded some demos with RKO records. By 1980, despite the interest of Major Label, they disbanded, and Littler joined White Brothers.

</doc>
<doc id="79880" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79880" title="Destruction (DC Comics)">
Destruction (DC Comics)

Destruction is one of the Endless, fictional characters from Neil Gaiman's comic book series "The Sandman".
Fictional Biography Within "The Sandman".
He is the fourth eldest of the Endless, and is depicted as a big, red-haired, bearded man (somewhat resembling actor Brian Blessed; Gaiman has mentioned that he would like Blessed to play Destruction in the event of a Sandman movie). He is also known as Olethros. In appearances set in earlier centuries, he is depicted wearing military gear (such as a musketeer's uniform, or plate armour), though in more recent times he is shown in colourful clothes with no particular theme. When Delirium and Morpheus encounter him in the seventh collection of issues in the series, "", he has taken to wearing his hair in a ponytail, and owns a talking dog, Barnabas. Since he abandoned his responsibilities there is no sigil in the galleries for him, though he keeps his own gallery (wherein is a sword, his sigil). His realm is not portrayed in the series.
Destruction abandoned his realm and his responsibilities some time around the turn of the seventeenth century. The reason for this was the onset of the human Age of Reason, which would eventually culminate in the invention of the atomic bomb. Destruction was unwilling to be responsible for the destruction this would cause, and therefore left the family. He did not cease to exist as the active aspect of Destruction, he simply stopped directing the affairs over which he has control. As he says, destruction did not stop, it was merely no longer his fault. Destruction features most prominently in "Brief Lives", in which his siblings Morpheus and Delirium set out to track him down. When they finally meet they do not exactly argue but talk at cross-purposes; Destruction's choice of path baffles and to some degree infuriates Morpheus, while Destruction finds it hard to comprehend Morpheus' position and concentrates on trying to impart to him some wisdom on the necessity of change and self-knowledge. Delirium just wants her brother back; she is reliant on her siblings for support, particularly her elder brothers. In the end, Destruction simply leaves, packing his sword into a bindle, stepping into the sky and vanishing.
Destruction is self-obsessed in the most positive sense of that term; after giving up his responsibilities he concentrates instead on attempting to learn about his own nature and exert control over it. This is manifested in his deliberate attempt to subvert his own essential nature and create instead of destroy; he is shown at various points writing indifferent poetry, painting an indifferent picture, cooking a meal left untouched by those for whom it was intended, and brewing Greek coffee which Delirium fails to drink properly. Several characters refer to him as being a horrible artist. It's likely that Destruction is inspired by Death's suggestion that everyone can know everything. He tells Dream in "Brief Lives" that each Endless is really a lord of opposites: life and death, dreams and reality, destruction and creation, destiny and freedom, etc.
As an aspect of change, Destruction also foreshadows the eventual downfall and replacement of his brother Dream in this interaction. It was Destruction, in fact, who told Orpheus that Death had a way for him to visit the Underworld, which set off the chain of events leading to Dream's end.
Endless Nights.
He reappears in the Sandman sequel "", in the story "Destruction- On the Peninsula", where he is shown guiding and babysitting Delirium after a mental breakdown, and assisting in the excavation of a site that contains relics from a possible future. When he reappears later in the book, it is during the story arc "Destiny-Endless Nights". His statue in Destiny's garden is in line with the statues of the other Endless, facing the opposite direction, likely representing his aversion to his principles and obligations, and seclusion from his siblings, and his sigil and portrait (the fourth in chronologically-ordered row) in Destiny's gallery are draped with a cloth.

</doc>
<doc id="79881" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79881" title="Fsck">
Fsck

The system utility fsck (for "file system consistency check") is a tool for checking the consistency of a file system in Unix and Unix-like operating systems, such as Linux and OS X. It is similar to the chkdsk command in Microsoft Windows.
Pronunciation.
Like many computer jargon terms without vowels, fsck is essentially unpronounceable in most languages and so people are forced to improvise when speaking it aloud. It can be pronounced "F-S-C-K", "F-S-check", "fizz-check", "F-sack", "fisk", "fizik", "F-sick", "F-sock", "F-suck" (associated with how long it takes to run), "F-sek", the sibilant "fsk", "farsk" or "fusk".
Use.
Generally, fsck is run either automatically at boot time, or manually by the system administrator. The fsck command works directly on data structures stored on disk, which are internal and intrinsically specific to a file system implementation. A matching fsck command that is tailored specifically to the design of the file system is often provided by the authors of a file system. The exact behaviors of various fsck implementations vary, but they typically follow a common order of internal operations and provide a common command-line interface to the user.
Most fsck utilities provide options for either interactively repairing damaged file systems (the user must decide how to fix specific problems), automatically deciding how to fix specific problems (so the user does not have to answer any questions), or reviewing the problems that need to be resolved on a file system without actually fixing them. Partially recovered files where the original file name cannot be reconstructed are typically recovered to a "lost+found" directory that is stored at the root of the file system.
A system administrator can also run fsck manually if they believe there is a problem with the file system. Because running fsck to repair a file system which is mounted for read/write operations can potentially cause severe data corruption/loss, the file system is normally checked while unmounted, mounted read-only, or with the system in a special maintenance mode that limits the risk of such damage. A journaling file system is designed such that tools such as fsck do not need to be run after unclean shutdown (i.e. crash).
The UFS2 Filesystem in FreeBSD has a background fsck, so it is usually not necessary to wait for fsck to finish before accessing the disk. The modern and faster ZFS in FreeBSD, FreeNAS and PC-BSD has no "fsck" repair tool; instead, it has a repair tool called "scrub" which examines and repairs Silent Corruption and other problems. Additionally ZFS uses copy-on-write, intelligent data scrubbing and resilvering (resyncing). While fsck must be run on an unmounted and therefore unusable filesystem, scrub does not need the ZFS filesystem to be taken offline. scrub is designed to be used on a mounted filesystem. While fsck usually only checks metadata, such as the journal log, but never checks the data itself, scrub checks everything, including metadata and the data. It is also possible to simply swap a harddisk drive to a larger drive and resilver (repair) the zpool of disks. The ZFS file system was designed from the ground up with a focus on data integrity and protection against silent data corruption caused by bit rot, current spikes, bugs in disk firmware, ghost writes, and so on.
The equivalent programs on Microsoft Windows and MS-DOS are CHKDSK and SCANDISK.
Adoption as an expletive.
Before the rise of journaling file systems, it was common for an improperly shut-down Unix system's file system to develop a corrupted superblock. This possibly-serious problem could only be resolved by running fsck, which could take anywhere from a few seconds to hours, depending on the volume's size and disk I/O throughput. Because of the severity of fsck not being able to resolve this error, the terms "fsck" and "fscked" have come into use among Unix system administrators as a minced oath for "fuck" and "fucked".
It is unclear whether this usage was cause or effect, as a report from a question and answer session at USENIX 1998 claims that "fsck" originally had a different name.
Another online use of the term, as curt way of dismissing someone, was "Go fsck yourself", an injunction to a person to go and correct their issue (attitude, ignorance of the subject matter, etc.) before posting again. This takes the fsck process as a metaphor, since running fsck involves fixing fundamental errors on the file system before continuing work on it.
Examples.
The following example checks the file system configured to be mounted on /usr partition; the file system needs to be unmounted first:
The following example checks the Linux JFS file system on a mdadm software RAID device:

</doc>
<doc id="79883" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79883" title="Lucas Cranach the Younger">
Lucas Cranach the Younger

Lucas Cranach the Younger ("Lucas Cranach der Jüngere"; 4 October 1515 – 25 January 1586) was a German Renaissance painter and portraitist, also known as the son of Lucas Cranach the Elder.
Early life.
Lucas Cranach the Younger was born in Wittenberg on 4 October 1515 as the youngest son of Lucas Cranach the Elder and Barbara Brengebier. He began his career as an apprentice in his father's workshop alongside his brother Hans. Henceforth, his own reputation and fame grew. After his father's death, he assumed control over the workshop.
On February 20, 1541, he married Barbara Brück, who went on to bear three sons and a daughter. She died February 10, 1550, and thereafter Cranach remarried, wedding Magdalena Schurff on May 24, 1551. This union produced three daughters and two sons, including Augustin Cranach.
He is known for portraits and simple versions of allegorical and mythical scenes. The style of his paintings can be so similar to those of his father that there have been some difficulties in attribution of their works. Prominent scholars seem to, nowadays, tend toward the opinion of honest description of his talent as, stoic and undeveloped, at most.

</doc>
<doc id="79884" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79884" title="Lucas Cranach the Elder">
Lucas Cranach the Elder

Lucas Cranach the Elder ("Lucas Cranach der Ältere", c. 1472 – 16 October 1553) was a German Renaissance painter and printmaker in woodcut and engraving. He was court painter to the Electors of Saxony for most of his career, and is known for his portraits, both of German princes and those of the leaders of the Protestant Reformation, whose cause he embraced with enthusiasm, becoming a close friend of Martin Luther. He also painted religious subjects, first in the Catholic tradition, and later trying to find new ways of conveying Lutheran religious concerns in art. He continued throughout his career to paint nude subjects drawn from mythology and religion. He had a large workshop and many works exist in different versions; his son Lucas Cranach the Younger, and others, continued to create versions of his father's works for decades after his death. Lucas Cranach the Elder has been considered the most successful German artist of his time.
Early life.
He was born at Kronach in upper Franconia, probably in 1472. His exact date of birth is unknown. He learned the art of drawing from his father "Hans Maler" (his surname meaning "painter" and denoting his profession, not his ancestry, after the manner of the time and class). His mother, with surname Hübner, died in 1491. Later, the name of his birthplace was used for his surname, another custom of the times. How Cranach was trained is not known, but it was probably with local south German masters, as with his contemporary Matthias Grünewald, who worked at Bamberg and Aschaffenburg (Bamberg is the capital of the diocese in which Kronach lies). There are also suggestions that Cranach spent some time in Vienna around 1500.
According to Gunderam (the tutor of Cranach's children) Cranach demonstrated his talents as a painter before the close of the 15th century. His work then drew the attention of Duke Friedrich III, Elector of Saxony, known as Frederick the Wise, who attached Cranach to his court in 1504. The records of Wittenberg confirm Gunderam's statement to this extent that Cranach's name appears for the first time in the public accounts on the 24 June 1504, when he drew 50 gulden for the salary of half a year, as "pictor ducalis" ("the duke's painter"). Cranach was to remain in the service of the Elector and his successors for the rest of his life, although he was able to undertake other work.
Cranach married Barbara Brengbier, the daughter of a burgher of Gotha and also born there; she died at Wittenberg on 26 December 1540. Cranach later owned a house at Gotha, but most likely he got to know Barbara near Wittenberg, where her family also owned a house, that later also belonged to Cranach.
Career.
The first evidence of Cranach's skill as an artist comes in a picture dated 1504. Early in his career he was active in several branches of his profession: sometimes a decorative painter, more frequently producing portraits and altarpieces, woodcuts, engravings, and designing the coins for the electorate.
Early in the days of his official employment he startled his master's courtiers by the realism with which he painted still life, game and antlers on the walls of the country palaces at Coburg and Locha; his pictures of deer and wild boar were considered striking, and the duke fostered his passion for this form of art by taking him out to the hunting field, where he sketched "his grace" running the stag, or Duke John sticking a boar.
Before 1508 he had painted several altar-pieces for the Castle Church at Wittenberg in competition with Albrecht Dürer, Hans Burgkmair and others; the duke and his brother John were portrayed in various attitudes and a number of his best woodcuts and copper-plates were published.
In 1509 Cranach went to the Netherlands, and painted the Emperor Maximilian and the boy who afterwards became Emperor Charles V. Until 1508 Cranach signed his works with his initials. In that year the elector gave him the winged snake as an emblem, or Kleinod, which superseded the initials on his pictures after that date.
Cranach was the court painter to the electors of Saxony in Wittenberg, an area in the heart of the emerging Protestant faith. His patrons were powerful supporters of Martin Luther, and Cranach used his art as a symbol of the new faith. Cranach made numerous portraits of Luther, and provided woodcut illustrations for Luther's German translation of the Bible. 
Somewhat later the duke conferred on him the monopoly of the sale of medicines at Wittenberg, and a printer's patent with exclusive privileges as to copyright in Bibles. Cranach's presses were used by Martin Luther. His apothecary shop was open for centuries, and was only lost by fire in 1871.
Cranach, like his patron, was friendly with the Protestant Reformers at a very early stage; yet it is difficult to fix the time of his first meeting with Martin Luther. The oldest reference to Cranach in Luther's correspondence dates from 1520. In a letter written from Worms in 1521, Luther calls him his "gossip", warmly alluding to his "Gevatterin", the artist's wife. Cranach first made an engraving of Luther in 1520, when Luther was an Augustinian friar; five years later, Luther renounced his religious vows, and Cranach was present as a witness at the betrothal festival of Luther and Katharina von Bora. He was also godfather to their first child, Johannes "Hans" Luther, born 1526. In 1530 Luther lived at the citadel of Veste Coburg under the protection of the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and his room is preserved there along with a painting of him. The Dukes became noted collectors of Cranach's work, some of which remains in the family collection at Callenberg Castle.
The death in 1525 of the Elector Frederick the Wise and Elector John's in 1532 brought no change in Cranach's position; he remained a favourite with John Frederick I, under whom he twice (1531 and 1540) filled the office of burgomaster of Wittenberg.
In 1547, John Frederick was taken prisoner at the Battle of Mühlberg, and Wittenberg was besieged. As Cranach wrote from his house to the grand-master Albert, Duke of Prussia at Königsberg to tell him of John Frederick's capture, he showed his attachment by saying, I cannot conceal from your Grace that we have been robbed of our dear prince, who from his youth upwards has been a true prince to us, but God will help him out of prison, for the Kaiser is bold enough to revive the Papacy, which God will certainly not allow.
During the siege Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, remembered Cranach from his childhood and summoned him to his camp at Pistritz. Cranach came, and begged on his knees for kind treatment for Elector John Frederick.
Three years afterward, when all the dignitaries of the Empire met at Augsburg to receive commands from the emperor, and Titian came at Charles's bidding to paint King Philip II of Spain, John Frederick asked Cranach to visit the city; and here for a few months he stayed in the household of the captive elector, whom he afterward accompanied home in 1552.
He died at age 81 on October 16, 1553, at Weimar, where the house in which he lived still stands in the marketplace.
Cranach had two sons, both artists: Hans Cranach, whose life is obscure and who died at Bologna in 1537; and Lucas Cranach the Younger, born in 1515, who died in 1586. He also had three daughters. One of them was Barbara Cranach, who died in 1569, married Christian Brück (Pontanus), and was an ancestor of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
His granddaughter married Polykarp Leyser the Elder, thus making him an ancestor of the Polykarp Leyser family of theologians.
Veneration.
The Lutheran Church remembers Cranach as a great Christian on April 6 along with Dürer, and possibly Matthias Grünewald or Burgkmair. The liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) honors Cranach, Dürer and Grünewald on August 5.
Works and art.
The oldest extant picture by Cranach is the "Rest of the Virgin during the Flight into Egypt", of 1504. The painting already shows remarkable skill and grace, and the pine forest in the background shows a painter familiar with the mountain scenery of Thuringia. There is more forest gloom in landscapes of a later time.
Following the huge international success of Dürer's prints, other German artists, much more than Italian ones, devoted their talents to woodcuts and engravings. This accounts for the comparative unproductiveness as painters of Albrecht Dürer and Hans Holbein the Younger, and also may explain why Cranach was not especially skilled at handling colour, light, and shade. Constant attention to contour and to black and white, as an engraver, seems to have affected his sight; and he often outlined shapes in black rather than employing modelling and chiaroscuro.
The largest proportion of Cranach's output is of portraits, and it is chiefly thanks to him that we know what the German Reformers and their princely adherents looked like. He painted not only Martin Luther himself but also Luther's wife, mother and father. He also depicted leading Catholics like Albert of Brandenburg, archbishop elector of Mainz, Anthony Granvelle and the Duke of Alva.
A dozen likenesses of Frederick III and his brother John are dated 1532. It is characteristic of Cranach's prolific output, and a proof that he used a large workshop, that he received payment at Wittenberg in 1533 for "sixty pairs of portraits of the elector and his brother" on one day. Inevitably the quality of such works is variable.
Religious subjects.
Cranach's religious subjects reflect the development of the Protestant Reformation, and its attitudes to religious images. In his early career, he painted several Madonnas; his first woodcut (1505) represents the Virgin and three saints in prayer before a crucifix. Later on he painted the marriage of St. Catherine, a series of martyrdoms, and scenes from the Passion.
After 1517 he occasionally illustrated the old subjects, but he also gave expression to some of the thoughts of the Reformers, although his portraits of reformers were more common than paintings of religious scenes. In a picture of 1518, where a dying man offers "his soul to God, his body to earth, and his worldly goods to his relations", the soul rises to meet the Trinity in heaven, and salvation is clearly shown to depend on faith and not on good works.
Other works of this period deal with sin and divine grace. One shows Adam sitting between John the Baptist and a prophet at the foot of a tree. To the left God produces the tables of the law, Adam and Eve partake of the forbidden fruit, the brazen serpent is reared aloft, and punishment supervenes in the shape of death and the realm of Satan. To the right, the Conception, Crucifixion and Resurrection symbolize redemption, and this is duly impressed on Adam by John the Baptist. There are two examples of this composition in the galleries of Gotha and Prague, both of them dated 1529.
Towards the end of his life, after Luther's initial hostility to large public religious images had softened, Cranach painted a number of "Lutheran altarpieces" of the Last Supper and other subjects, in which Christ was shown in a traditional manner, including a halo, but the apostles, without halos, were portraits of leading reformers. He also produced a number of violent anti-Catholic propaganda prints, in a cruder style, directed against the Papacy and the Catholic clergy. His best known work in this vein was a series of prints for the pamphlet "Passional Christi und Antichristi", where scenes from the "Passion of Christ" were matched by a print mocking practices of the Catholic clergy, so that Christ driving the money-changers from the Temple was matched by the Pope, or Antichrist, signing indulgences over a table spread with cash (see gallery below).
One of his last works is the altarpiece, completed after his death by Lucas Cranach the Younger in 1555, for the Stadtkirche (city church) at Weimar. The iconography is original and unusual: Christ is shown twice, to the left trampling on Death and Satan, to the right crucified, with blood flowing from the lance wound. John the Baptist points to the suffering Christ, whilst the blood-stream falls on the head of a portrait of Cranach, and Luther reads from his book the words, "The blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin."
Mythological scenes.
Cranach was equally successful in somewhat naive mythological scenes which nearly always feature at least one slim female figure, naked but for a transparent drape or a large hat.
These are mostly in narrow upright formats; examples are several of Venus, alone or with Cupid, who has sometimes stolen a honeycomb, and complains to Venus that he has been stung by a bee (Weimar, 1530; Berlin, 1534). Diana with Apollo, shooting a bow, and Hercules sitting at the spinning-wheel mocked by Omphale and her maids are other such subjects. A similar approach was taken with the biblical subjects of Salome and Adam and Eve.
These subjects were produced early in his career, when they show Italian influences including that of Jacopo de' Barberi, who was at the court of Saxony for a period up to 1505. They then become rare until after the death of Frederick the Wise. The later nudes are in a distinctive style which abandons Italian influence for a revival of Late Gothic style, with small heads, narrow shoulders, high breasts and waists. The poses become more frankly seductive and even exhibitionist.
Humour and pathos are combined at times in pictures such as "Jealousy" (Augsburg, 1527; Vienna, 1530), where women and children are huddled into groups as they watch the strife of men wildly fighting around them. A lost canvas of 1545 is said to show hares catching and roasting hunters. In 1546, possibly under Italian influence, Cranach composed the "Fons Juventutis" ("Fountain of Youth"), executed by his son, a picture in which older women are seen entering a Renaissance fountain, and exiting it transformed into youthful beauties.

</doc>
<doc id="79887" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79887" title="Rodan">
Rodan

Overview.
Name.
The Japanese name "Radon" is a contraction of "pteranodon"), and may also have been chosen to suggest radiation. Radon is usually referred to as "Rodan" for English speaking markets; however, in Toho's English dub for "Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II", the character is completely referenced as "Radon" the whole time.
Development.
Rodan is classified as a pteranodon in the films. It is occasionally portrayed as a rival and enemy of Godzilla, but is usually depicted as one of Godzilla's allies, much like Anguirus. Rodan and Anguirus both started out as enemies of Godzilla, which may explain the occasional enmity shown between the creatures and Godzilla itself on the rare occasion that they are pitted against one another. In Rodan's debut, two individuals of their kind appeared, who were both siblings.

</doc>
<doc id="79888" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79888" title="Fruit tree pruning">
Fruit tree pruning

Fruit tree pruning is the cutting and removing of parts of a fruit tree. It covers a number of horticultural techniques that control growth, remove dead or diseased wood, and stimulate the formation of flowers and fruit buds. Pruning often means cutting branches back, sometimes removing smaller limbs entirely. It may also mean removal of young shoots, buds, leaves, etc. Careful attention to pruning and training young trees affects their later productivity and longevity. Good pruning and training can also prevent later injury from weak crotches or forks (where a tree trunk splits into two or more branches) that break from the weight of fruit, snow, or ice on the branches.
Some sustainable agriculture or permaculture personalities, such as Sepp Holzer and Masanobu Fukuoka, advocate and practice no-pruning methods.
Overview.
Plants form new tissue in an area called the meristem, located near the tips of roots and shoots, where active cell division takes place. Meristem growth is aimed at ensuring that leaves are quickly elevated into sunlight, and that roots are able to penetrate deeply into the soil. Once adequate height and length is achieved by the stems and roots, they begin to thicken to support the plant. On the shoots, these growing tips of the plant are called "apical" buds. The "apical meristem" (or tip) produces the growth hormone auxin, which not only promotes cell division, but also diffuses downwards and inhibits the development of lateral bud growth that otherwise competes with the apical tip for light and nutrients. Removing the apical tip and its suppressive hormone lets lower, dormant lateral buds develop, and the buds between the leaf stalk and stem produce new shoots that compete to become lead growth.
Manipulating this natural response to damage (known as the principle of apical dominance) by processes such as pruning (as well as coppicing and pollarding) allows the arborist to determine the shape, size, and productivity of many fruiting trees and bushes. The main aim when pruning fruit trees is usually to maximize fruit yield. Unpruned trees tend to produce large numbers of small fruits that may be difficult to reach when harvesting by hand. Branches can become broken by the weight of the crop, and the cropping may become biennial (that is, bearing fruit only every other year). Overpruned trees on the other hand tend to produce light crops of large, flavourless fruit that does not store well. Careful pruning balances shoot growth and fruit production.
Formative pruning of bush trees.
In the early years of the tree's life, it is important to develop a framework sufficiently strong to bear the weight of crops. This requires formative pruning to reinforce the tree. Formative pruning of apple ("Malus pumila") and pear ("Pyrus communis") trees should be carried out in the dormant winter months. For the Northern hemisphere, this should occur between November and March; For the Southern hemisphere, June and September. Stone fruits—such as cherries, plums, and gages—have different requirements, and should not be pruned in dormant months.
Maiden tree.
A maiden whip (a one-year-old tree with no side shoots) should be pruned to a bud with two buds below it at about 80 cm from the ground immediately after planting to produce primary branches during the first growing season. A feathered maiden (that is, a one-year-old tree with several side branches) should have its main stem pruned back to three or four strong shoots at 80 cm from the ground. Side shoots should be shortened by two thirds of their length to an upward or outward facing bud. Lower shoots should be removed flush with the stem.
Two year.
Remove lower shoots and prune between three and five of the best-placed shoots by half to an upwards or outwards facing bud to form what becomes the tree's main structural branches. Remove any inward-facing shoots.
Three year.
Prune leading shoots of branches selected to extend the framework by half, to a bud facing in the desired direction. Select four good laterals to fill the framework and shorten these by a half. Prune any remaining laterals to four buds to form fruiting spurs.
Four year.
The tree has begun to fruit and requires only limited formative pruning. Shorten leaders by one third and prune laterals not required to extend the framework to four buds.
Five year and onwards.
The tree is established, and should be pruned annually as described in the following section.
Pruning the cropping tree.
Before pruning, distinguish between spur-bearing varieties, tip-bearing varieties, and an intermediate between the two that bears both on spurs and at the tips. Spur-bearing trees occur more frequently than tip-bearing trees, and they bear most of their fruit yearly at the end of short lateral pieces of wood (spurs) up to about 4 inches long.
Spur-bearing types include apples of the varieties 'Cox's Orange Pippin', 'James Grieve' and 'Sunset', and pears such as 'Conference', 'Doyenne du Commice', and 'Williams Bon Chretien'. Tip-bearers on the other hand produce most of their fruit buds at the tips of slender shoots grown the previous summer, and include the apples 'Worcester Pearmain' and 'Irish Peach', and the pears such as 'Jargonelle' and 'Josephine de Malines'. There are basically three types of pruning that are applied once the main shape of the tree has been established. These are:
Pruning of tip bearers.
Tip-bearers should be pruned lightly in winter using the regulatory system (see above). Any maiden shoots less than 25 cm in length should be left untouched as they have fruit buds at their tips. Longer shoots are spur pruned to prevent overcrowding and to stimulate the production of more short-tip-bearing shoots the following year. Branch leaders are 'tipped', removing the top three or four buds to a bud facing in the desired direction to make them branch out and so produce more tip-bearing shoots.

</doc>
<doc id="79896" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79896" title="Pichichi Trophy">
Pichichi Trophy

In Spanish football, the Trofeo Pichichi is awarded by the sports newspaper "Marca" to the top goalscorer of each La Liga season. Named after the Athletic Bilbao striker Rafael "Pichichi" Moreno, the trophy has been awarded annually since the 1952–53 season. All top scorers who preceded the award's creation were retrospectively named Pichichi winners by "Marca".
The Pichichi is not officially recognised by the league's governing body, the Liga de Fútbol Profesional (LFP). As the award is based on "Marca"s subjective criteria, its data may differ from the official match delegate reports. For the top scorers in La Liga according to LFP data, see Spanish football top scorers.

</doc>
<doc id="79898" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79898" title="Mímir">
Mímir

Mímir (Old Norse "The rememberer, the wise one") or Mim is a wisdom deity in Norse mythology. He is closely associated with a magical well of knowledge that bears his name, the Mímisbrunnr. At the conclusion of the Æsir-Vanir War he was sent to the Vanir along with the god Hœnir as part of a peaceful hostage exchange. Fearing trickery from the Aesir because of Hœnir's foolishness, the Vanir beheaded Mímir and returned his head to Asgard. In order to keep Mímir's wisdom, Odin preserved his head with magic so it could continue to provide knowledge and counsel as his advisor.
Mímir is attested in the "Poetic Edda", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, the "Prose Edda", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson of Iceland, and in euhemerized form as one of the Æsir in "Heimskringla", also written by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century. Mímir's name appears in the names of the well Mímisbrunnr, the tree Mímameiðr, and the wood Hoddmímis holt.
Attestations.
"Poetic Edda".
Mímir is mentioned in the "Poetic Edda" poems "Völuspá" and "Sigrdrífumál". In "Völuspá", Mímir is mentioned in two stanzas. Stanza 28 references Odin's sacrifice of his eye to Mímir's Well, and states that Mímir drinks mead every morning "from the Father of the Slain's wager." Stanza 46 describes that, in reference to Ragnarök, the "sons" of Mím are at play while "fate burns" (though no further information about these "sons" has survived), that the god Heimdallr blows the Gjallarhorn, and that Mímir's severed head gives counsel to Odin. The single mention in stanza 14 of "Sigrdrífumál" is also a reference to Mímir's speaking, decollated head. Stanzas 20 and 24 of the poem "Fjölsvinnsmál" refer to Yggdrasil as "Mímameiðr".
"Prose Edda".
In chapter 15 of the "Prose Edda" book "Gylfaginning", as owner of his namesake well, Mímir himself drinks from it and gains great knowledge. To drink from the well, he uses the Gjallarhorn, a drinking horn which shares its name with the sounding horn used by Heimdallr intended to announce the onset of Ragnarök. The section further relates that the well is located beneath one of the three roots of Yggdrasil, in the realm of the frost jötnar.
Chapter 51 relates that, with the onset of Ragnarök, "Heimdall stands up and blows the Gjallarhorn with all his strength. He wakens all the gods who then hold an assembly. Odin now rides to Mimir's Well, seeking council for both himself and his followers. The ash Yggdrasil shakes, and nothing, whether in heaven or on earth, is without fear."
In the "Prose Edda" book "Skáldskaparmál", Mímir's name appears in various kennings. These kennings include "Mím's friend" (for "Odin") in three places, "mischief-Mímir" (a kenning for "jötunn"), and among a list of names for jötunn.
"Heimskringla".
Mímir is mentioned in chapters 4 and 7 of the saga "Ynglinga Saga", as collected in "Heimskringla". In chapter 4, Snorri presents a euhemerized account of the Æsir-Vanir War. Snorri states that the two sides eventually tired of the war and both agree to meet to establish a truce. The two sides meet and exchanged hostages. Vanaheimr are described as having sent to Asgard their best men: Njörðr—described as wealthy—and his son Freyr in exchange for Asaland's Hœnir—described here as large, handsome, and thought of by the people of Vanaheimr well suited to be a chieftain. Additionally, the Æsir send Mímir—described as a man of great understanding—in exchange for Kvasir, who Snorri describes as the wisest man of Vanaheimr.
Snorri continues that, upon arrival in Vanaheimr, Hœnir was immediately made chief and Mímir often gave him good counsel. However, when Hœnir was at meetings and at the Thing without Mímir by his side, he would always answer the same way: "Let others decide." Subsequently, the Vanir suspected they had been cheated in the exchange by the Æsir, so they seized Mimir and beheaded him and sent the head to Asgard. Odin took the head of Mímir, embalmed it with herbs so that it would not rot, and spoke charms over it, which gave it the power to speak to him and reveal to him secrets. The head of Mímir is again mentioned in chapter 7 in connection with Odin, where Odin is described as keeping Mímir's head with him and that it divulged information from other worlds.
Theories.
On the basis of "Hávamál" 140 – where Odin learns nine magic songs from the unnamed brother of his mother Bestla – some scholars have theorized that Bestla's brother may in fact be Mímir, who is then Odin's maternal uncle. This also means that Mimir's father would be Bölþorn.
In the theories of Viktor Rydberg, Mímir's wife is Sinmara, named in the poem "Fjölsvinnsmal". According to Rydberg, the byname "Sinmara" ("sinew-maimir") refers to "Mímir-Niðhad"'s "queen ordering Völund's hamstrings to be cut".

</doc>
<doc id="79899" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79899" title="Clarius">
Clarius

Clarius can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79900" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79900" title="Cydippe">
Cydippe

The name Cydippe () is attributed to four individuals in Greek mythology.

</doc>
<doc id="79902" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79902" title="Biton (disambiguation)">
Biton (disambiguation)

Biton is a Hebrew surname common in Israel.
It may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79903" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79903" title="Cleta">
Cleta

In Greek mythology, Cleta (, "the glorious") or Kleta, was one of the Charites (Graces).
The Lakedaemonians, say that the Charites are two, who gave them the names of Cleta and Phaenna. Her name means "Renowned".

</doc>
<doc id="79904" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79904" title="Ford Prefect (character)">
Ford Prefect (character)

Ford Prefect (also called Ix) is a fictional character in "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" by the British author Douglas Adams. He is the only character other than the protagonist, Arthur Dent, to appear throughout the entire "Hitchhiker's" saga. His role as Arthur's friend – and rescuer, when the Earth is unexpectedly demolished to make way for a hyperspace bypass at the start of the story – is often expository, as Ford is an experienced galactic hitch-hiker and explains that he is actually an alien journalist, a field researcher for the titular "Guide" itself, and not an out-of-work actor from Guildford as he had hitherto claimed.
Name.
Although Ford had taken great care to blend into Earth society, he had "skimped a bit on his preparatory research," and thought that the name "Ford Prefect" would be "nicely inconspicuous." The Ford Prefect was a popular British car manufactured from 1938 to 1961, and Adams later clarified in an interview that Ford "had simply mistaken the dominant life form" of Earth. This was expanded on somewhat in the film version, where Ford is almost run over while attempting to greet a blue Ford Prefect. He is saved by Arthur and, in the film version of events, this is how the pair meet. The graphics in the TV series provide a similar explanation by listing a sequence of names including 'Ford', beginning with director John Ford, Arthur Ford, news reader Anna Ford, carmaker Henry Ford, the Ford Anglia, the Ford Consul with the final name Ford Prefect being selected.
Adams later observed that this joke was lost on U.S. audiences who assumed it was a typing error for "perfect." In some versions, such as the French ("Le Guide Galactique") and the Greek ("Γυρίστε τον Γαλαξία με Ωτοστόπ"), Ford's name was changed to "Ford Escort." Nowadays, the joke is largely lost on younger audiences in Britain as well, since the Ford Prefect is now a rare sight on British roads. In the film adaptation, his last name was never actually stated on-screen, but it is given in the film's credits as "Prefect."
First birth name.
In a footnote in the novel, we are told that Ford's original name is "only pronounceable in an obscure Betelgeusian dialect" which was almost wiped out by the "Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758," a mysterious catastrophe which took place on the planet of Betelgeuse Seven and which Ford's father was the only man to survive. Ford never learned to pronounce his original name, which was a matter that caused his father to die of shame (which is still a terminal disease in some parts of the Universe). At school, he was nicknamed "Ix," which translates as "boy who is not able satisfactorily to explain what a Hrung is, nor why it should choose to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven".
Despite all this, his semi-cousin (in the film and radio show they are said to share three of the same mothers) Zaphod Beeblebrox calls him "Ford" the first time they are reunited in all versions of the story except for the film, where Zaphod addresses him as "Praxibetel Ix," then introduces him by saying "This is my semi-half brother, Ix...Excuse me, Ford." While not explained in the book, a footnote of the original radio scripts explains that "just before arriving (on Earth) he registered his new name officially at the Galactic Nomenclaturoid Office, where they had the technology to unpick his old name from the fabric of space/time and thread the new one in its place, so that for all intents and purposes his name had always been and would always be Ford Prefect."
Character and role.
Ford is pragmatic to the point of fatalism, endlessly broad-minded – no doubt due to his vast experience of roughing it around the galaxy – and possessed of an off-key and often very black sense of humour. He is described as being able to smile in a way that would "send hitherto sane men scampering into the trees". In his role as guide to the universe for the often bewildered everyman Arthur Dent, he serves to link the disparate elements of the story together. As well as rescuing Arthur, he introduces him to the other major characters – such as Zaphod, Trillian and Marvin the Paranoid Android – and to numerous mind-boggling concepts, from 'teasers' (an explanation of UFO sightings on Earth) to the extraordinary usefulness of towels. Ford's other chief characteristic is his constant pursuit of alcoholic drinks and a good time (in contrast to Arthur's quest for a cup of tea). Adams said finding motivations for Ford's character in order to keep him engaged in the narrative became increasingly difficult as the series of novels progressed, because although his heart is in the right place and he is shown to be highly intelligent, resourceful and even brave, Ford is essentially a dilettante when it comes to causes such as the search for the question to the ultimate answer of life, the universe and everything.
Ford is approximately two hundred years old, as supported by the books. When, in the first novel, Zaphod steals the spaceship "Heart of Gold", it is on Zaphod's two-hundredth birthday. It is later mentioned that Ford and Zaphod attended school together, even having some of the same classes, which would indicate that they are roughly the same age. He had originally planned to spend a week on Earth doing research for the "Guide", but wound up being stranded there for 15 years prior to helping Arthur escape the planet when the Vogons demolish it.
Portrayals.
In the original radio series and subsequent LP adaptation, Ford was played by Geoffrey McGivern. On television he was played by David Dixon, and in the film he was played by Mos Def. In "The Illustrated Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" he is portrayed by Tom Finnis.

</doc>
<doc id="79906" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79906" title="Disfranchisement">
Disfranchisement

Disfranchisement (also called disenfranchisement) is the revocation of the right of suffrage (the right to vote) of a person or group of people, or through practices, prevention of a person exercising the right to vote. Disfranchisement is also termed to the revocation of power or control of a particular individual, community or being to the natural amenity they are abound in; that is to deprive of a franchise, of a legal right, of some privilege or inherent immunity. Disfranchisement may be accomplished explicitly by law or implicitly through requirements applied in a discriminatory fashion, intimidation, or by placing unreasonable requirements on voters for registration or voting.
By place of residence and ethnicity.
United States.
In the United States, state governments have had the right to establish requirements for voters, voter registration, and conduct of elections. Since the founding of the nation, legislatures have gradually expanded the franchise (sometimes following federal constitutional amendments), from certain propertied white men to almost universal adult suffrage of age 18 and over, with the notable exclusion of persons convicted of some crimes [http://felonvoting.procon.org/view.resource.php?resourceID=000286]. Expansion of suffrage was made on the basis of lowering property requirements, granting suffrage to freedmen and restoring suffrage in some states to free people of color following the American Civil War, to white women in 1920, all Native Americans in 1924, and persons over the age of 18 in the 1970s.
Washington, D.C..
When the District of Columbia was established as the national capital, with lands contributed by Maryland and Virginia, its residents were not allowed to vote for local or federal representatives, in an effort to prevent the district from endangering the national government. Congress had a committee, appointed from among representatives elected to the House, that administered the city and district in lieu of local or state government. Residents did not vote for federal representatives who were appointed to oversee them.
In 1804, US Congress cancelled holding US Presidential elections in Washington, D.C. or allowing residents to vote in them. Amendment 23 was passed by Congress and ratified in 1964 to restore the ability of District residents to vote in presidential elections.
In 1846, the portion of Washington, D.C. contributed from Virginia was "retrocessioned" (returned) to Virginia to protect slavery. Persons residing there (in what is now Alexandria), vote in local, Virginia and US elections.
Congress uses the same portion of the US Constitution to exclusively manage local and State level law for the citizens of Washington, D.C. and US military bases in the US. Until 1986, military personnel living on bases were considered to have special status as national representatives and prohibited from voting in elections where their bases were located. In 1986, Congress passed a law to enable US military personnel living on bases in the US to vote in local and state elections.
The position of non-voting delegate to Congress from the District was reestablished in 1971. The delegate cannot vote for bills before the House, nor floor votes, but may vote for some procedural and committee matters. In 1973, the District of Columbia Home Rule Act reestablished local government after a hundred-year gap, with regular local elections for mayor and other posts. They do not elect a US senator. People seeking standard representation for the 600,000 District of Columbia residents describe their status as being disfranchised in relation to the federal government. They do vote in presidential elections.
Comparisons.
No NATO (US military allies) nor OECD country (US industrialized allies) until 2009, disfranchises citizens of their respective national capitals for national legislature elections. No US state prohibits residents of capitals from voting in state elections, and their cities are contained within regular representative state and congressional districts.
Puerto Rico.
U.S. federal law applies to Puerto Rico, although Puerto Rico is not a state. Due to the Federal Relations Act of 1950, all federal laws that are "not locally inapplicable" are automatically the law of the land in Puerto Rico (39 Stat. 954, 48 USCA 734). According to ex-Chief of the Puerto Rico Supreme Court Jose Trias Monge, "no federal law has ever been found to be locally inapplicable to Puerto Rico. Puerto Ricans were conscripted into the U.S. armed forces; they have fought in every war since they became U.S. citizens in 1917. Puerto Rico residents are subject to most U.S. taxes.
Contrary to common misconception, residents of Puerto Rico do pay U.S. federal taxes and contribute to Social Security, Medicare and other programs through payroll taxes. But, these American citizens have no Congressional representation nor do they vote in U.S. presidential elections.
Juan Torruella and other scholars argue that the U.S. national-electoral process is not a democracy due to issues related to lack of voting rights in Puerto Rico and representation. Both the Puerto Rican Independence Party and the New Progressive Party reject Commonwealth status. The remaining political organization, the Popular Democratic Party has officially stated that it favors fixing the remaining "deficits of democracy" that the Clinton and Bush administrations publicly recognized through Presidential Task Force Reports.
Denmark.
Citizens of Denmark are in general not allowed to vote in Danish elections if they reside outside of the country for more than two years.
By disability.
Failure to make adequate provision for disabled electors can result in the selective disenfranchisement of disabled people. Accessibility issues need to be considered in electoral law, voter registration, provisions for postal voting, the selection of polling stations, the physical equipment of those polling stations and the training of polling station staff. This disenfranchisement may be a deliberate facet of electoral law, a consequence of a failure to consider the needs of anyone other than non-disabled electors, or an ongoing failure to respond to identified shortcomings in provision.
Note that in the case of disabled voters the issue may be actual disenfranchisement of someone previously able to vote, rather that "ab initio" disfranchisement. This may result from the transition from non-disabled to disabled, from changes in the effects of a disability, or changes in the accessibility of the electoral process.
Access issues.
Access presents special difficulties for disabled voters.
Campaigns for improvement.
The disability rights movement in the UK has increased attention on electoral accessibility. Campaigns such as Scope's 'Polls Apart' have exposed violations at polling stations.
Resulting from criminal conviction.
United States.
Many states intentionally retract the franchise from convicted felons, but differ as to when or if the franchise can be restored. In those states, felons are also prohibited from voting in federal elections, even if their convictions were for state crimes.
Maine and Vermont allow prison inmates as well as probationers and parolees to vote.
Twenty states (Alaska, Arkansas, Georgia, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin) do not allow persons convicted of a felony to vote while serving a sentence, but automatically restore the franchise to the person upon completion of a sentence. In Iowa, in July 2005, Governor Tom Vilsack issued an executive order restoring the right to vote for all persons who have completed supervision, which the Iowa Supreme Court upheld on October 31, 2005.
Thirteen states (Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, New Hampshire, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Utah) plus the District of Columbia allow probationers and parolees to vote, but not inmates.
Five states (California, Colorado, Connecticut, New York, and South Dakota) allow probationers to vote, but not inmates or parolees.
Eight states (Alabama, Arizona, Delaware, Kentucky, Mississippi, Nevada, Tennessee, and Wyoming) allow some, but not all, persons with felony convictions to vote after having completed their sentences. Some have qualifications of this: for example, Delaware does not restore the franchise until five years after release of a person. Similarly, Kentucky requires that the person take action to gain restoration of the franchise.
Two states (Florida and Virginia) permanently disfranchise persons with felony convictions.
Disfranchisement due to criminal conviction, particularly after a sentence is served, has been opposed by the Sentencing Project, an organization in the United States working to reduce arbitrary prison sentences for minor crimes and to ameliorate the negative effects of incarceration to enable persons to rejoin society after completing sentences. Its website provides a wealth of statistical data that reflects opposing views on the issue, and data from the United States government and various state governments about the practice of felony disfranchisement.
Such disenfranchisement policy currently excludes one in six African-American males. For example, in the 1998 elections, at least 10 states formally disenfranchised 20 percent of African-American voters due to felony convictions ("Journal of Blacks in Higher Education," 1999). Excluding felons provided “a small but clear advantage to Republican candidates in every presidential and senatorial election from 1972 to 2000” (Manza & Uggen, 2006, p. 191). In addition, felon disenfranchisement may have changed the course of history by costing Al Gore the 2000 presidential election (Uggen & Manza, 2002). Similarly, if not for felon disenfranchisement, Democratic senatorial candidates would likely have prevailed in Texas (1978), Kentucky (1984 and 1992), Florida (1988 and 2004), and Georgia (1992) (Manza & Uggen, 2006, p. 194).
United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom suspends suffrage of some but not all prisoners. For example, civil prisoners sentenced for nonpayment of fines can vote. Prior to the judgment in "Hirst v United Kingdom (No 2)", convicted prisoners had the right to vote in law but without assistance by prison authorities, voting was unavailable to prisoners. In Hirst, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that First Protocol Article 3 requires Member States to proactively support voting by authorized inmates. In the UK, as of 2009 this policy is under review as in other European countries like Italy.
Lord Falconer of Thoroton, former Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs, stated that the ruling may result in some, but not all, prisoners being able to vote. The consultation is to be the subject of Judicial Review proceedings in the High Court. Separate challenges by the General Secretary of the Association of Prisoners, Ben Gunn, by way of petition to the European Union Parliament, and John Hirst to the Committee of Ministers are underway.
Ireland.
To comply with the judgment in "Hirst v United Kingdom" (no 2), the Republic of Ireland passed a statute allowing convicted prisoners to have postal votes.
Germany.
In Germany, all convicts are allowed to vote while in prison unless the loss of the right to vote is part of the sentence; courts can only apply this sentence for specific "political" crimes (treason, high treason, electoral fraud, intimidation of voters, etc.) and for a duration of two to five years. All convicts sentenced to at least one year in prison automatically lose the right to be elected in public elections for a duration of five years, and lose all positions they held as a result of such an election.
Israel.
Inmates are allowed to vote in Israel. They do not suffer disfranchisement following release from prison after serving their sentence, parole, or probation. Neither courts nor prison authorities have the power to disqualify any person from exercising the right to vote in national elections, whatever the cause of imprisonment.
Others.
In some countries, such as China and Portugal, disfranchisement due to criminal conviction is an exception, meted out separately in a particular sentence. Losing voting rights is usually imposed on a person convicted of a crime against the state (see civil death) or one related to election or public office.

</doc>
<doc id="79907" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79907" title="The Meaning of Liff">
The Meaning of Liff

The Meaning of Liff (UK Edition: ISBN 0-330-28121-6, US Edition: ISBN 0-517-55347-3) is a humorous dictionary of toponymy and etymology, written by Douglas Adams and John Lloyd, published in the United Kingdom in 1983 and the United States in 1984.
Content.
The book is a "dictionary of things that there aren't any words for yet". Rather than inventing new words, Adams and Lloyd picked a number of existing place-names and assigned interesting meanings to them, meanings that can be regarded as on the verge of social existence and are ready to become recognisable entities.
All the words listed are toponyms and describe common feelings and objects for which there is no current English word. Examples are "Shoeburyness" ("The vague uncomfortable feeling you get when sitting on a seat that is still warm from somebody else's bottom") and "Plymouth" ("To relate an amusing story to someone without remembering that it was they who told it to you in the first place").
The book cover usually bears the tagline "This book will change your life", either as part of its cover or as an adhesive label. "Liff" (a village near Dundee in Scotland) is then defined in the book as "A book, the contents of which are totally belied by its cover. For instance, any book the dust jacket of which bears the words, 'This book will change your life'."
Origin and publication.
According to Adams' account, the idea behind "The Meaning of Liff" grew out of an old school game and started when he and Lloyd were on holiday together in Corfu in 1978 during the writing of the first Hitchhiker's novel. This idea was used as part of the "Not the Nine O'Clock News" spin-off book "Not 1982" (ISBN 0-571-11853-4), where they were headed "Today's new word from the Oxtail English Dictionary". The suggestion of turning this into a complete book in itself came from Faber MD Matthew Evans. The bulk of the text was written by Adams and Lloyd in Summer 1982 in Malibu, California.
Essentially the same idea was used by the English humourist Paul Jennings in an article "Ware, Wye, Watford", published in the late 1950s. Adams speculated that the teacher who originated the school game may have done so after reading the article. He sent a note of apology to Jennings. Fellow humourist Miles Kington defended Adams and Lloyd in his column in "The Times", noting a difference in style between the books.
The book was released in the UK in November 1983 in time for the Christmas market. It was a commercial success for Pan Books.
The title of the book was chosen to be very similar to Monty Python's film "The Meaning of Life" that was being produced at the same time, after Douglas Adams called Terry Jones to ask if it would be OK. Adams' idea was that the potential confusion with the film's script would help to sell more copies of the book. In fact, in the beginning of the Monty Python film, the gravestone with the title "The Meaning of Liff" appears before a lightning bolt strikes the last F and converts it to an E.
Versions.
A revised and expanded edition of the original book, with about twice as many definitions, was published in 1990 as The Deeper Meaning of Liff (UK Edition: ISBN 0-330-31606-0, US Edition: ISBN 0-517-58597-9), though the original remains in print. Some of the new words in "Deeper" had previously appeared in a Liff piece by Adams, Lloyd and Stephen Fry in "The Utterly Utterly Merry Comic Relief Christmas Book" (1986). The main differences between the two editions (for either version of the book) are those of American English v. British English spellings, though "The Deeper Meaning of Liff" contains different definitions for both the word "Glossop" and the titular word "Liff". In "The Deeper Meaning of Liff", Liff is defined as a phenomenon for which there is no word.
Another edition in the series, "Afterliff", has been released, with more entries contributed by Lloyd, Jon Canter and Douglas Adams' daughter Polly.
On 15 August 2013, a 30th anniversary deluxe edition was published.
A German adaptation was made by Sven Böttcher under the title "Der tiefere Sinn des Labenz", published in 1992 (ISBN 3-453-87960-0). The meanings are translated from the original but are matched to place names that convey the humorous effect in German. The most recent edition includes both the German adaptation and the English original (ISBN 3-453-87960-0).
In 1989, a Dutch version was published under the title Kunt U Breukelen? by Justus van Oel (Nijgh & van Ditmar, ISBN 90 236 7311 5), utilising the same book size format as the standard UK version, 9.1 x 16.8 cm. The book used place names mainly from the Netherlands, as well as a handful from neighbouring Belgium and Luxembourg. There was no hardback edition, and neither was the Deeper Meaning of Liff adapted for the Dutch market. It was reissued in 2000 with a different cover.
The Finnish adaptations "Elimäen tarkoitus" and "Elimäen perimmäinen tarkoitus" were published in 1996 and 1997 (ISBN 952-9646-26-7 and ISBN 952-9646-52-6).
Following the 2005 movie and the TV adaptations of "Last Chance To See" and "Dirk Gently", there was talk from ITV, not yet acted upon, of a TV version of "The Meaning Of Liff".
Comedian Anders Lund Madsen wrote a Danish version with the title "Madsens ÆØÅ - Dictionary of things for which there funnily enough not yet exists words for", published 1997. It is not a translation; instead it is stated "Idea stolen from Douglas Adams & John Lloyd" and The Meaning of Liff is mentioned in the publisher's copyright text.
External links.
""The Meaning of Liff" at 30", produced by BBC Radio 4 

</doc>
<doc id="79908" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79908" title="Coeus">
Coeus

In Greek mythology, Coeus (, Koios, "query, questioning") was one of the Titans, the giant sons and daughters of Uranus (Heaven) and Gaia (Earth). His equivalent in Latin poetry—though he scarcely makes an appearance in Roman mythology—was Polus, the embodiment of the celestial axis around which the heavens revolve. The etymology of Coeus' name provided several scholars the theory that Coeus was also the Titan god of intellect, who represented the inquisitive mind.
Like most of the Titans he played no active part in Greek religion—he appears only in lists of Titans—but was primarily important for his descendants. With his sister, "shining" Phoebe, Coeus fathered Leto and Asteria. Though it is not explicitly mentioned, Lelantos was implied to be a son of Coeus, or at least Leto's male counterpart. Leto copulated with Zeus (the son of fellow Titans Cronus and Rhea) and bore Artemis and Apollo.
Given that Phoebe symbolized prophetic wisdom just as Coeus represented rational intelligence, the couple may have possibly functioned together as the primal font of all knowledge in the cosmos. Along with the other Titans, Coeus was overthrown by Zeus and the other Olympians in the Titanomachy. Afterwards, he and all his brothers were imprisoned in Tartarus by Zeus. Coeus, later overcome with madness, broke free from his bonds and attempted to escape his imprisonment, but was repelled by Cerberus. 

</doc>
<doc id="79909" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79909" title="Rafael Moreno Aranzadi">
Rafael Moreno Aranzadi

Rafael Moreno Aranzadi (23 May 1892 – 1 March 1922), known as Pichichi (Little Duck), was a Spanish footballer who played as a striker.
He played for Athletic Bilbao during the 1910s and 1920s.
Club career.
Born in Bilbao, Biscay, Pichichi played in his first Copa del Rey final in March 1913. Athletic Bilbao, his sole club, lost 0–1 against Racing Club de Irún. Later the same year, on 21 August, the same opponents, now renamed Real Unión, were invited to play the inaugural game at San Mamés Stadium, and he scored the very first goal at the new ground.
Pichichi subsequently played in five other domestic cup finals, winning four. He netted a hat-trick in the 1915 final as Athletic beat RCD Español 5–0. He died on 2 March 1922 at the age of only 29, victim of a sudden attack of typhus.
International career.
In 1920, Pichichi was a member of the very first Spanish national team that played at the Olympic Games in Belgium.
He gained five senior caps during one month, his debut coming on 28 August in a 1–0 win against Denmark.

</doc>
<doc id="79911" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79911" title="Amiga 2000">
Amiga 2000

The Amiga 2000, or A2000, is a personal computer released by Commodore in March 1987. It was introduced as a "big box" expandable variant of the Amiga 1000 but quickly redesigned to share most of its electronic components with the contemporary Amiga 500 for cost reduction. Expansion capabilities include two 3.5" drive bays (one of which was used by the included floppy drive) and one 5.25" bay that could be used by a 5.25" floppy drive (for IBM PC compatibility), a hard drive, or CD-ROM once they became available.
The Amiga 2000 was the first Amiga model to allow expansion cards to be added internally. SCSI host adapters, memory cards, CPU cards, network cards, graphics cards, serial port cards, and PC compatibility cards were available, and multiple expansions could be used simultaneously without requiring an additional expansion cage like the Amiga 1000. The Amiga 2000 not only included five Zorro II card slots, the motherboard also had four PC ISA slots, two of which were inline with Zorro II slots for use with the A2088 Bridge board, which added IBM PC XT compatibility to the A2000.
The Amiga 2000 was the most versatile and expandable Amiga computer until the Amiga 3000T was introduced four years later.
Features.
Aimed at the high-end market, the original Europe-only model adds a Zorro II backplane, implemented in programmable logic, to the custom Amiga chipset used in the Amiga 1000. Later improved models have redesigned hardware using the more highly integrated A500 chipset, with the addition of a gate-array called "Buster", which integrates the Zorro subsystem. This also enabled handoff of the system control to a coprocessor slot device, and implemented the full video slot for add-on video devices.
Like the earlier Amiga 1000 and most IBM PC compatibles of the era, and unlike the Amiga 500, the A2000 came in a desktop case with a separate keyboard. The case was taller than the A1000 to accommodate expansion cards, two 3.5" and one 5.25" drive bays. The A2000's case lacks the "keyboard garage" of the Amiga 1000 but has space for five Zorro II expansion slots, two 16-bit and two 8-bit ISA slots, a CPU upgrade slot and a video slot. Unlike the A1000, the A2000's motherboard includes a battery-backed real-time clock.
The Amiga 2000 offered graphics capabilities exceeded among its contemporaries only by the Macintosh II, which sold for about twice the price of a comparably-outfitted Amiga 2000 additionally equipped with the IBM PC Compatible Bridge board and 5.25" floppy disk drive (which was important for real-world interoperability at this time). Also like the A1000, the A2000 was sold only by specialty computer dealers. It was originally announced at a price of 
The A2000 was largely succeeded by the Amiga 3000 in 1990. The 3000 featured fewer options for internal expansion than the 2000 models, so Commodore supplemented the Amiga 3000 with the Amiga 3000T in 1991.
Variants.
The Amiga 2000 was always designed as an open architecture. Commodore's engineers knew that Commodore would be unsuccessful in matching the rate of system obsolesce and replacement then common in the PC industry, with new models every year or so. Commodore's approach was to build a single system architecture that could span different models. Commodore was so successful at this that Info magazine judged that the A2000 would not become obsolete "until well after the turn of the century" at the earliest!
The final design was the result of an internal battle within Commodore, which pitted the American division, who wanted to build a system more like the Amiga 3000 (and 1000), against Commodore's German division, which was fresh off the successful introduction of the first Commodore PC compatible systems and planned to include this capability in the Amiga 2000 from the start. The bottom-line practicality of the German design won out, and the final A2000 shipped with not only Zorro II slots, but a compliment of PC standard (for the day) ISA slots.
This architecture was subject to major revisions. The "B2000-CR" motherboard was the most common, showing up as the first major revision. It was designed by Dave Haynie and Terry Fisher (whose names are printed on the board) and, while an A2000 variant, was a redesign of the Amiga 1000 motherboard incorporating some Amiga 500 technological advances to achieve the "CR": Cost Reduction.
The original Amiga 2000 shipped with just a single floppy drive for storage. This was followed up fairly early by the Amiga 2000/HD, which bundled an Amiga 2090 hard drive controller and a SCSI-based hard drive. In 1988, Commodore shipped the Amiga 2500/20, which added the Amiga 2620 CPU card to the CPU slot, a 14.3 MHz 68020, a 68881 FPU, and a 68851 MMU to the A2000, along with 2 MB of 32-bit-wide memory. The 2000's original 68000 CPU remained installed on the motherboard of these machines, but was not used. In 1989, this model was replaced by the Amiga 2500/30, which added an Amiga 2630 CPU card: 25 MHz 68030 and the 68882 FPU with up to 4 MB of 32-bit memory. The A2630 card could also take a memory expansion daughter card, capable of supporting up to 64 MB of additional memory. Commodore built an in-house prototype of this, but never released one.
Amiga 1500.
In 1990, Commodore UK sold a variant of the A2000, the A1500, for £999. The model designation was not officially sanctioned by Commodore International. The A1500 shipped with dual floppy drives, and 1 MB of ChipRAM as standard. Initial units came with Kickstart 1.3 (and thus AmigaOS 1.3), though the Original Chipset onboard included a later Agnus revision allowing the 1MB of ChipRAM. Early machines were bundled with a Commodore 1084SD1 monitor. Later machines came with the ECS chipset and AmigaOS 2.04. The second floppy drive replaced the hard disk drive. The A1500 had no hard disk drive as standard.
A1500s were easily convertible into A2000/HDs by addition of a hard disk controller (and associated drive), and then simply peeling off the A1500 label revealing the A2000 label beneath.
The reason for the UK-only release may have been the existence of a desktop upgrade kit for the Amiga 500 made by Checkmate Digital and also called A1500, and Commodore trying to keep the name for themselves.
Amiga 2500.
The Amiga 2500, also known as the A2500, was not a distinct model, but simply a marketing name for an Amiga 2000 bundled with a Motorola 68020 or 68030-based accelerator card. The accelerator cards used by the A2500 (the A2620 and A2630) were also available separately as upgrades for the A2000. 68030 versions were referred to as A2500/30.
Because the A2500 had a Motorola 68000 on the motherboard that went unused, the design was not very cost-effective. A project to replace it with a 68020 on-board began, intending to be a Zorro-II based 68020 machine, but the project eventually became the Amiga 3000 when Dave Haynie sought to include his new Zorro-III bus.
The A2500 remained in production after the release of the A3000, primarily because the original Video Toaster would not fit in an unmodified A3000 case. Until the release of the Video Toaster 4000, the A2500 was the fastest computer available for use with the Toaster.
Technical information.
The majority of A2000 systems shipped with Commodore's Original Chip Set and 1 MB of RAM (512 KB of "chip" RAM and 512 KB additional RAM) and either AmigaOS 1.2 or 1.3. Later revisions shipped with the improved Enhanced Chip Set, 1 MB "chip" RAM and AmigaOS 2.0.
The A2000 shipped with a Motorola 68000 CPU, running at 7.16 MHz (NTSC) or 7.09 MHz (PAL). The CPU can be upgraded to a 68010 by direct replacement. Official and third-party expansion boards, which fit in the CPU expansion slot, feature 68020, 68030, 68040 or 68060 microprocessors. Such upgrades may also accommodate additional RAM, FPUs, MMUs and even SCSI controllers.
Memory capacity varies according to the hardware revision. Certain revisions of the A2000 can be upgraded to accommodate 1 MB of chip RAM by installing an 8372A Agnus chip. Likewise, 2 MB can be accommodated by fitting an 8372B Agnus chip and adding extra memory. There is a practical limit of 8 MB of additional RAM without the use of a CPU expansion card, due to the 68000's 24-bit address bus.
The A2000 brought a new capability to the Amiga line, the Zorro II bus. This expansion bus allows installation of compatible hardware through the AutoConfig standard, such as, graphic, sound and network cards and Parallel ATA, SCSI and USB controllers.
The ISA slots can be activated by use of a "bridgeboard", which connects the Zorro II and ISA buses. Such bridgeboards typically feature on-board IBM PC Compatible hardware, including Intel 80286, 80386 or 80486 microprocessors allowing emulation of an entire IBM-PC system in hardware. The remaining ISA slots allow can then be used with industry standard hardware of the era, such as, network cards, graphics cards and hard drive controllers. In some A2000 models, the two 8-bit ISA slots can also be upgraded to 16-bit by fitting extension edge connectors.
The video slot presented clocks, all 12-bits of digital video, Genlock signals, and some control lines for use to add-on cards. This allowed use of dedicated genlocks, display de-interlacers, and video switching and effects systems such as NewTek's Video Toaster.

</doc>
<doc id="79912" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79912" title="Baronet">
Baronet

A baronet ( or ; abbreviated Bart or Bt) or the rare female equivalent, a baronetess (; abbreviation "Btss"), is the holder of a baronetcy, a hereditary title awarded by the British Crown. The practice of awarding baronetcies was originally introduced in England in the 14th century and was used by James I of England in 1611 as a means of raising funds.
A baronetcy is the only British hereditary honour that is not a peerage, with the exception of the Anglo-Irish Black Knight, White Knight and Green Knight (of which only The Green Knight is extant). A baronet is addressed as "Sir", just as is a knight (or "Dame" in the case of a baronetess), but ranks above all knighthoods and damehoods in the Order of precedence, except for the Order of the Garter and the Order of the Thistle (and the defunct Order of St Patrick).
Baronets are not formally deemed noble, although they are widely regarded as being members of the aristocracy. In Europe their social rank is roughly equivalent to "petite noblesse".
History of the term.
The term baronet has medieval origins. Sir Thomas de La More, describing the Battle of Boroughbridge, mentioned that baronets took part, along with barons and knights.
According to the Standing Council of the Baronetage:
Under the two royal warrants of 1612 and 1613 issued by James I certain privileges were accorded to baronets of England. Firstly, no person or persons should have place between baronets and the younger sons of peers. Secondly, the right of knighthood was established for the eldest sons of baronets (this was later revoked by George IV in 1827), and thirdly, baronets were allowed to augment their armorial bearings with the Arms of Ulster on an inescutcheon: "in a field Argent, a Hand Geules (or a bloudy hand)". These privileges were extended to baronets of Ireland, and for baronets of Scotland the privilege of depicting the Arms of Nova Scotia as an augmentation of honour. The former applies to this day for all baronets of Great Britain and of the United Kingdom created subsequently.
The title of baronet was initially conferred upon noblemen who lost the right of individual summons to Parliament, and was used in this sense in a statute of Richard II. A similar title of lower rank was banneret.
The revival of baronetcies can be dated to Sir Robert Cotton's discovery in the late 16th or early 17th century of Sir William de La Pole's patent (issued in the 13th year of Edward III's reign, "ie." 1340), conferring upon him the dignity of a baronet upon payment of a fee.
Subsequent baronetcies fall into the following five categories:
Since 1965 only one new baronetcy has been created, for Sir Denis Thatcher on 7 December 1990, husband of a former British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher ("later" Baroness Thatcher); their eldest son, Sir Mark Thatcher, succeeded as 2nd Baronet upon his father's death in 2003.
Conventions.
Like knights, baronets are accorded the style "Sir" before their first name. Baronetesses in their own right use "Dame", also before their first name, while wives of baronets use "Lady" followed by the husband's (marital) surname only, this by longstanding courtesy. Wives of baronets are not baronetesses; only women holding baronetcies in their own right are so styled.
Unlike knighthoods—which apply to the recipient only—a baronetcy is hereditarily entailed. The eldest son of a baronet who is born in wedlock succeeds to a baronetcy upon his father's death, but will not be officially recognised until his name is recognised by being placed on the Official Roll. With some exceptions granted with special remainder by letters patent, baronetcies are descend through the male line.
A full list of extant baronets appears in "Burke's Peerage and Baronetage", which also published a record of extinct baronetcies.
A baronetcy is not a peerage, so baronets like knights and junior members of peerage families are commoners and not peers of the realm ("nb." in the UK, all people save the Royal family and peers are considered commoners). According to the Home Office there is a tangible benefit to the honour of baronet: according to law, a baronet is entitled to have "a pall supported by two men, a principal mourner and four others" assisting at his funeral. Originally baronets also had other rights, including the right to have the eldest son knighted on his 21st birthday. However, at the beginning of George IV's reign, these rights were eroded by Orders-in-Council on the grounds that Sovereigns should not necessarily be bound by acts made by their predecessors. Baronets although never having been automatically entitled to heraldic supporters, were allowed them in heredity in the first half of the 19th century where the title holder was also a Knight Grand Cross of a Crown order.
Baronets of Scotland or Nova Scotia were allowed to augment their armorial bearings with the Arms of Nova Scotia and the privilege of wearing a neck badge signifying "of Nova Scotia", suspended by an orange-tawny ribbon. This consists of an escutcheon Argent with a Saltire Azure, an inescutcheon of the Royal Arms of Scotland, with an Imperial Crown above the escutcheon, and encircled with the motto "Fax Mentis Honestae Gloria". This badge may be shown suspended by the ribbon below the escutcheon.
Baronets of England and Ireland applied to King Charles I for permission to wear a badge. Although a badge was worn in the 17th century, it was not until 1929 that King George V granted permission for all baronets (other than those of Scotland) to wear badges.
Addressing a baronet, the wife of a baronet, or a baronetess.
A baronet is referred to and addressed as, for example, "Sir <Joseph>" (using his forename). The correct style on an envelope for a baronet who has no other titles is "Sir <Joseph Bloggs>, Bt." or "Sir <Joseph Bloggs>, Bart." The letter would commence: "Dear Sir <Joseph>".
The wife of a baronet is addressed and referred to as "Lady <Bloggs>"; at the head of a letter as "Dear Lady <Bloggs>". Her given name is used only when necessary to distinguish between two holders of the same title. For example, if a baronet has died and the title has passed to his son, the widow (the new baronet's mother) will remain "Lady <Bloggs>" if he is unmarried, but if he is married his wife becomes "Lady <Bloggs>" while his mother will be known by the style "<Alice>, Lady <Bloggs>". Alternatively, the mother may prefer to be known as "The Dowager Lady <Bloggs>". A previous wife will also become "<Alice>, Lady Bloggs" to distinguish her from the current wife of the incumbent baronet. She would not be "Lady <Alice> <Bloggs>", a style reserved for the daughters of peers.
The children of a baronet are known as "The Honourable [Surname".
For a baronetess, one should write "Dame <Daisy Smith>, Btss" on the envelope. At the head of the letter, one would write "Dear Dame <Daisy>," and to refer to her, one would say "Dame <Daisy>" or "Dame <Daisy Smith>" (never "Dame <Smith>").
Baronetesses.
In history there have been only four baronetesses:
In 1976 Lord Lyon King of Arms stated that, without examining the patent of every Scottish baronetcy, he was not in a position to confirm that only these four title creations could pass through female lines.
, there are no living baronetesses.
Territorial designations.
All baronetcies are created with a territorial sub-designation, however only more recent creations duplicating the original creation require territorial designations. So, for example, there are baronetcies Moore of Colchester, Moore of Hancox, Moore of Kyleburn, and Moore of Moore Lodge.
Heraldic badges.
Red Hand of Ulster.
Baronets of England, Ireland, Great Britain or the United Kingdom ("ie." all except baronets of Nova Scotia) can display the Red Hand of Ulster (sinister (left) hand version) as a heraldic badge, being the arms of the ancient kings of Ulster. This badge (or augmentation of honour) is blazoned as follows: "Argent a Hand sinister couped at the wrist extended in pale Gules". King James I of England established the hereditary Order of Baronets in England on 22 May 1611, in the words of "Collins' Peerage" (1741): "for the plantation and protection of the whole Kingdom of Ireland, but more especially for the defence and security of the Province of Ulster, and therefore for their distinction those of this order and their descendants may bear the badge (Red Hand of Ulster) in their coats of arms either in canton or an escutcheon at their election". Since 1929 such baronets may also display the Red Hand of Ulster on its own as a badge, suspended by a ribbon below the shield of arms.
Arms of Nova Scotia.
Baronets of Nova Scotia, unlike other baronets, do not use the Baronet's Badge (of Ulster), but have their own badge showing the Coat of arms of Nova Scotia: "Argent, a Saltire Azure with an inescutcheon of the Royal Arms of Scotland". From before 1929 to the present it has been customary practice for such baronets to display this badge on its own suspended by the order's ribbon below the shield of arms.
Number of baronetcies.
The first publication listing all baronetcies ever created was C. J. Parry's "Index of Baronetcy Creations" (1967). This listed them in alphabetical order, other than the last five creations (Dodds of West Chillington, Redmayne of Rushcliffe, Pearson of Gressingham, Finlay of Epping and Thatcher of Scotney). It showed the total number created from 1611 to 1964 to have been 3,482. They include five of Oliver Cromwell, several of which were recreated by Charles II. Twenty-five were created between 1688 and 1784 by James II in exile after his dethronement, by his son James Stuart ("The Old Pretender") and his grandson Charles Edward Stuart ("Bonny Prince Charlie"). These "Jacobite baronetcies" were never accepted by the English Crown, have all disappeared and should properly be excluded from the 3,482, making the effective number of creations 3,457. A close examination of Parry's publication shows he missed one or two, so there may well have been some more.
The total number of baronetcies today is approximately 1,270, although only some 1,020 are on "The Official Roll of the Baronetage". It is unknown whether some baronetcies remain extant and it may be that nobody can prove himself to be the actual heir. Over 200 baronetcies are now held by peers and others, such as the Knox line, have been made tenuous due to internal family dispute.
Baronetage decline since 1965.
There were 1,490 baronetcies extant on 1 January 1965 since when there has been a loss of about 260 baronetcies through extinction or dormancy resulting in a gross decline of 17.5% or almost one sixth over 50 years.
There have however been some exceptions to this trend - a new creation (Thatcher baronetcy, "of Scotney" (1990)) and five baronetcies dormant in 1965 and since revived - Innes baronetcy, "of Coxton" (1686), Nicolson baronetcy of that Ilk and of Lasswade (1629), Hope baronetcy, "of Kirkliston" (1698), St John ("later" St John-Mildmay) baronetcy, "of Farley" (1772) and Maxwell-Macdonald baronetcy of Pollok (1682)
Thus the net loss is 254 or 17.1%. Extant baronetcies number about 1,236 (as of 2015).
Baronetcies with special remainders.
Baronetcies usually descend through heirs male of the body of the grantee, and can rarely be inherited by females or collateral kins, unless created with special remainder, for example:
Premier Baronet.
England.
The Premier Baronet (of England) is the unofficial title afforded to the current holder of the oldest extant baronetcy in the realm. The Premier Baronet is regarded as the senior member of the Baronetage, and ranks above other baronets (unless they hold a peerage title) in the United Kingdom Order of Precedence. Sir Nicholas Bacon, 14th Baronet, is the current Premier Baronet, whose family's senior title was created by King James I in 1611.
Scotland.
The Premier Baronets of Nova Scotia (Scotland) were the Gordon baronets of Gordonstoun and Letterfourie until the title's extinction in 1908. Subsequently, the Premier Scottish Baronets are the Innes baronets of that Ilk (cr. 28 May 1625), the present Premier Baronet being Guy Innes-Ker, 10th Duke of Roxburghe.
Ireland.
The Premier Baronetcy of Ireland was created for Sir Dominic Sarsfield in 1619, and was held by his successors until the attainder of the 4th Viscount Sarsfield in 1691. Since then the descendants of Sir Francis Annesley Bt., the Annesley baronets, have been the Premier Baronets of Ireland; presently Francis William Dighton Annesley, 16th Viscount Valentia.
Baronetcies conferred upon British expatriates and non-British nationals.
Canada.
For a complete list see also list of Canadian baronetcies

</doc>
<doc id="79913" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79913" title="Viscount">
Viscount

A viscount ( , for male) or viscountess (, for female) is a title used in certain European countries for a noble of varying status, but historically deemed to convey a lower-middling rank.
In many countries a 'viscount', and its historical equivalents, was a non-hereditary, administrative or judicial position, and did not develop into an hereditary title until much later.
Etymology.
The word "viscount" comes from Old French "visconte" (modern French: "vicomte"), itself from Medieval Latin "vicecomitem", accusative of "vicecomes", from Late Latin "vice-" "deputy" + Latin "comes" (originally "companion"; later Roman imperial courtier or trusted appointee, ultimately count).
History.
During the Carolingian Empire, the kings appointed 'counts' to administer provinces and other smaller regions, as governors and military commanders. 'Viscounts' were appointed to assist the counts in their running of the province, and often took on judicial responsibility. The kings strictly prevented the offices of their counts and viscounts from becoming hereditary, in order to consolidate their position and limit chance of rebellion.
The title was in use in Normandy by at least the early eleventh century. Similar to the Carolingian use of the title, the Norman viscounts were local administrators, working on behalf of the Duke. Their role was to administer justice and to collect taxes and revenues, often being castellan of the local castle. Under the Normans, the position developed into an hereditary one, an example of such being the viscounts in Bessin. The viscount was eventually replaced by bailiffs, and provosts.
As a rank in British peerage, it was first recorded in 1440, when John Beaumont was created Viscount Beaumont by King Henry VI. The word "viscount" corresponds in the UK to the Anglo-Saxon "shire reeve" (root of the non-nobiliary, royal-appointed office of sheriff). Thus early viscounts were originally normally given their titles by the monarch, not hereditarily; but soon they too tended to establish hereditary principalities "lato sensu" (in the wider sense). They were a relatively late introduction to the British peerage, and on the evening of the Coronation of Queen Victoria in 1838, the Prime Minister Lord Melbourne explained to her why (from her journals):
""I spoke to Ld M. about the numbers of Peers present at the Coronation, & he said it was quite unprecedented. I observed that there were very few Viscounts, to which he replied "There are very few Viscounts," that they were an old sort of title & not really English; that they came from Vice-Comites; that Dukes & Barons were the only real English titles;—that Marquises were likewise not English, & that people were mere made Marquises, when it was not wished that they should be made Dukes.""
Early modern and contemporary usage.
United Kingdom.
A viscount is the fourth rank in the British peerage system, standing below an earl and above a baron. There are approximately 270 viscountships currently extant in the peerages of the British Isles, though most are secondary titles.
In British practice, the title of a viscount may be either a place name, a surname, or a combination thereof: examples include, the Viscount Falmouth, the Viscount Hardinge and the Viscount Colville of Culross, respectively. An exception exists for Viscounts in the peerage of Scotland, who were traditionally styled "The Viscount "of" such as the Viscount of Arbuthnott. In practice, however, very few maintain this style, instead using the more common version "The Viscount [X" in general parlance, for example Viscount of Falkland who is referred to as Viscount Falkland.
A British viscount is addressed in speech as "Lord while his wife is "Lady [X", and he is formally styled "The Viscount The children of a viscount are known as "The Honourable [Forename ".
Use as a courtesy title.
A specifically British custom is the use of viscount as a courtesy title for the heir of an earl or marquess. The peer's heir apparent will sometimes be referred to as a viscount, if the second most senior title held by the head of the family is a viscountcy. For example, the eldest son of the Earl Howe is Viscount Curzon, because this is the second most senior title held by the Earl.
However, the son of a marquess or an earl can be referred to as a viscount when the title of viscount is not the second most senior if those above it share their name with the substantive title. For example, the second most senior title of the Marquess of Salisbury is the Earl of Salisbury, so his heir uses the lower title of Viscount Cranborne.
Sometimes the son of a peer can be referred to as a viscount even when he could use a more senior courtesy title which differs in name from the substantive title. Family tradition plays a role in this. For example, the eldest son of the Marquess of Londonderry is Viscount Castlereagh, even though the Marquess is also the Earl Vane.
Coronet.
A viscount's coronet of rank bears 16 silver balls around the rim. Like all heraldic coronets, it is mostly worn at the coronation of a sovereign, but a viscount has the right to bear his coronet of rank on his coat of arms, above the shield. In this guise, the coronet is shown face-on, featuring 9 silver balls.
Jersey.
The island of Jersey still retains an officer whose function is purely to administer orders of the island's judiciary, and whose position remains non-hereditary. The role of the Viscount of Jersey (French: "Vicomte de Jersey") involves managing fines, bail monies, seizures, confiscations, evictions, service of process, arrests for non-appearance in court and other enforcement procedures, as well acting as coroner for sudden or unexpected deaths and managing jury selection.
Portugal.
In the former kingdom of Portugal a "visconde" ranks above a "barão" (baron) and below a "conde" (count). The first Portuguese viscountcy, that of D. Leonel de Lima, visconde de Vila Nova de Cerveira, dates from the reign of Afonso V. A flood of viscountcies, some 86 new titles, were awarded in Portugal between 1848 and 1880.
Spain.
The Spanish title of "vizconde" is ranked between the title "conde" (count/earl) and the, relatively rare, title of "barón".
In Spain, nobles are classified as either Grandee of Spain (Grandes de España), as titled nobles, or as untitled nobles. A grandee of any rank outranks a non-grandee, even if that non-grandee's title is of a higher degree, thus, a viscount-grandee enjoys higher precedence than a marquis who is not a grandee.
In the kingdom of Spain the title was awarded from the reign of Felipe IV (1621–65; Habsburg dynasty) until 1846.
Equivalent titles.
Germanic counterparts.
There are non-etymological equivalents to the title of viscount ("i.e.", 'vice-count') in several languages including German.
However, in such case titles of the etymological Burgrave family (not in countries with a viscount-form, such as Italian "burgravio" alongside "visconte") bearers of the title could establish themselves at the same gap, thus at generally the same level. Consequently, a "Freiherr" (or Baron) ranks not immediately below a "Graf", but below a "Burggraf".
Thus in Dutch, "Burggraaf" is the rank above Baron, below Graaf ("i.e.", Count) in the kingdoms of the Netherlands and of Belgium (by Belgian law, its equivalents in the other official languages are "Burggraf" in German and "vicomte" in French). In Welsh the title is rendered as "Isiarll".
Non-western counterparts.
Like other major Western noble titles, Viscount is sometimes used to render certain titles in non-western languages with their own traditions, even though they are as a rule historically unrelated and thus hard to compare which are considered 'equivalent' in relative rank.
The Japanese cognate "shishaku" ("shi") (Japanese: ) was the fourth of the five peerage ranks established in the Meiji era. The Japanese system of nobility, Kazoku, which existed between 1884 and 1947 was based heavily on the British peerage. At the creation of the system, viscounts were the most numerous of all the ranks, with 324 being created compared to 11 non-imperial princes or dukes, 24 marquesses, 76 counts and 74 barons, for a total of 509 peers.
Other equivalent titles existed, such as:

</doc>
<doc id="79915" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79915" title="Baron">
Baron

Baron is a title of honour, often hereditary, and ranks as one of the lower titles in the various nobiliary systems of Europe. The female equivalent is Baroness.
Etymology.
The word "baron" comes from the Old French "baron", from a Late Latin "baro" "man; servant, soldier, mercenary" (so used in Salic Law; Alemannic Law has "barus" in the same sense). The scholar Isidore of Seville in the 7th century thought the word was from Greek βαρύς "heavy" (because of the "heavy work" done by mercenaries), but the word is presumably of Old Frankish origin, cognate with Old English "beorn" meaning "warrior, nobleman". Cornutus in the first century already reports a word "barones" which he took to be of Gaulish origin. He glosses it as meaning "servos militum" and explains it as meaning "stupid", by reference to classical Latin "bārō" "simpleton, dunce"; because of this early reference, the word has also been suggested to derive from an otherwise unknown Celtic "*bar", but the Oxford English Dictionary takes this to be "a figment".
Continental Europe.
France.
During the Ancien Régime, French baronies were very much like Scottish ones. Feudal landholders were entitled to style themselves "baron" if they were nobles; a "roturier" (commoner) could only be a "seigneur de la baronnie" (lord of the barony). These baronies could be sold freely until 1789 when feudal law was abolished. The title of baron was assumed as a "titre de courtoisie" by many nobles, whether members of the Nobles of the Robe or cadets of Nobles of the Sword who held no title in their own right. Emperor Napoléon created a new "empire nobility", in which baron was the second lowest title. The titles followed a male-only line of descent and could not be purchased. In 1815, King Louis XVIII created a new peerage system based on the British model. Baron-peer was the lowest title, but the heirs to pre-1789 barons could remain barons, as could the elder sons of viscount-peers and younger sons of count-peers. This peerage system was abolished in 1848.
Germany.
In pre-republican Germany all the knightly families of the Holy Roman Empire (sometimes distinguished by the prefix "von" or "zu") eventually were recognised as of baronial rank, although "Ritter" is the literal translation for "knight", and persons who held that title enjoyed a distinct, but lower, rank in Germany's nobility than barons ("Freiherren"). The wife of a Freiherr (Baron) is called a Freifrau or sometimes Baronin, his daughter Freiin or sometimes Baroness. 
Families which had always held this status were called "Uradel" ('ancient nobility'), and were heraldically entitled to a three pointed coronet. Families which had been ennobled at a definite point in time ("Briefadel" or "nobility by patent") had seven points on their coronet. These families held their fief in vassalage from a suzerain. The holder of an allodial (i.e., suzerain-free) barony was thus called a Free Lord, or "Freiherr". Subsequently, sovereigns in Germany conferred the title of "Freiherr" as a rank in the nobility, without implication of allodial or feudal status.
Today, as of 1919 on, there is no legal privilege associated with hereditary titles in Germany. In modern, republican Germany, "Freiherr" and "Baron" remain heritable only as part of the legal surname (and may thereby be transmitted by males to their wives and children, without implication of nobility). As opposed to this, hereditary titles have been banned completely in Austria. Thus, a member of the formerly imperial House of Habsburg or any other member of the former nobility would in most cases simply be addressed as "Herr/Frau (Habsburg)" in an official/public surrounding, for instance in the media. Still, in both countries, honorary styles like "His/her (Imperial/Royal) Highness", "Serenity", etc. persists in social use as a form of utmost courtesy.
In Luxembourg and Liechtenstein (where German is the official language), barons remain members of the recognized nobility, and the sovereigns retain authority to confer the title (morganatic cadets of the princely dynasty received the title "Baron of Lanskron", using "both" "Freiherr" and "Baron" for different members of this branch.)
Generally, all legitimate males of a German baronial family inherit the title "Freiherr" or "Baron" from birth, as all legitimate daughters inherit the title of "Freiin" or "Baroness". As a result, German barons have been more numerous than those of such countries where primogeniture with respect to title inheritance prevails (or prevailed) as France and the United Kingdom.
Italy.
In Italy, was the lowest rank of feudal nobility except for that of signore or (lord of the manor). The title of baron was most generally introduced into southern Italy (including Sicily) by the Normans during the 11th century. Whereas originally a barony might consist of two or more manors, by 1700 we see what were formerly single manors erected into baronies, counties or even marquisates. Since the early 1800s, when feudalism was abolished in the various Italian states, it has often been granted as a simple hereditary title without any territorial designation or "predicato." The untitled younger son of a baron is a "nobile dei baroni" and in informal usage might be called a baron, while certain baronies devolve to heirs male general. Since 1948 titles of nobility have not been recognised by the Italian state. In the absence of a nobiliary or heraldic authority in Italy there are, in fact, numerous persons who claim to be barons or counts without any basis for such claims. Baron and noble (nobile) are hereditary titles and, as such, could only be created or recognised by the kings of Italy or (before 1860) the pre-unitary Italian states such as the Two Sicilies, Tuscany, Parma or Modena, or by the Holy See (Vatican) or the Republic of San Marino. Beginning around 1800, a number of signori (lords of the manor) began to style themselves "barone" but in many cases this was not sanctioned legally by decree, while there was even less justification in the holder of any large (non-feudal) landed estate calling himself a baron. Nevertheless, both were common practices. In most of peninsular Italy the widespread medieval introduction of the title was Longobardic, while in Sicily and Sardinia it was coeval with Norman rule some centuries later, and one referred to the "baronage" when speaking of landed nobles generally. The heraldic coronet of an Italian baron is a jewelled rim of gold surmounted by seven visible pearls, set upon the rim directly or upon stems; alternately, the French style coronet (entwined in a string of small pearls, with or without four bigger visible pearls set upon the rim) is used.
The Low Countries.
In the medieval era, some allodial and enfiefed lands held by nobles were created or recognized as baronies by the Holy Roman Emperors, within whose realm most of the Low Countries lay. Subsequently, the Habsburgs continued to confer the baronial title in the Southern Netherlands, first as kings of Spain and then, again, as emperors until abolition of the Holy Roman Empire, but these had become titular elevations rather than grants of new territory.
In the Netherlands after 1815, titles of baron authorized by previous monarchs (except those of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Holland) were usually recognized by the Dutch kings. But such recognition was not automatic, having to be authenticated by the Supreme Council of Nobility and then approved by the sovereign. This ceased to be possible after the Dutch constitution was revised in 1983. More than one hundred Dutch baronial families have been recognized. The title is usually inherited by all males descended patrilineally from the original recipient of the title, although in a few noble families "baron" is the title of cadet family members, while in a few others it is heritable according to primogeniture.
After its secession in 1830, Belgium incorporated into its nobility all titles of baron borne by Belgian citizens which had been recognized by the Netherlands since 1815. In addition, its monarchs have since created or recognized other titles of baron, and the sovereign continues to exercise the prerogative to confer baronial and other titles of nobility. "Baron" is the third lowest title within the nobility system above "Chevalier/Ridder" and below "Viscount". There are still a number of families in Belgium that bear the title of baron.
Luxembourg's monarch retains the right to confer the baronial title. Two of the grand duchy's prime ministers inherited baronial titles that were used during their tenures in office, Victor de Tornaco and Félix de Blochausen.
Nordic countries.
In Norway, king Magnus VI of Norway (1238–1280) replaced the title Lendmann with Baron, but in 1308 Haakon V abolished the title.
The present corresponding title is "Baron" in the Danish nobility and that of Norway, "Friherre" ("Baron" is used orally, while it is written as "Friherre") in the Swedish nobility, and "Vapaaherra" in the nobility of Finland.
In the beginning, Finnish nobles were all without honorific titulature, and known simply as lords. Since the Middle Ages, each head of a noble family had been entitled to a vote in any of Finland's provincial diets whenever held, as in the realm's Herrainpäivät, later Aatelissääty of the Riksdag of the Estates. In 1561, Sweden's King Eric XIV granted the hereditary titles of count and "vapaaherra" to some of these, but not all. Although their cadet family members were not entitled to vote or sit in the Riksdag, they were legally entitled to the same title as the head of the family, but in customary address they became "Paroni" or "Paronitar". Theoretically, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, families elevated to "vapaaherra" status were granted a barony in fief, enjoying some rights of taxation and judicial authority. Subsequently, the "barony" was titular, usually attached to a family property, which was sometimes entailed. Their exemptions from taxes on landed properties continued into the twentieth century, although in the nineteenth century tax reforms narrowed this privilege. Nobility creations continued until 1917, the end of Finland's grand ducal monarchy.
Russia.
Muscovite Russia had no traditional baronial titles of its own; they were introduced in early Imperial Russia by Peter the Great. In the hierarchy of nobility introduced by Peter the Great, barons (барон) ranked above untitled nobility and below counts (граф "graf"). The styles "Your Well-born" (Rus. Ваше благородие) and "Master Baron" (Rus. Господин барон) were used to address a Russian baron.
There were two main groups of nobility which held the baronial title. One was the Baltic German nobility, for which Russia merely recognized their pre-existing titles; the other was new barons created by the Emperors of Russia post 1721. Like in many other countries, new baronial titles were often created by ennoblement of rich bourgeoisie. The title of baron, along with the rest of the noble hierarchy, was abolished in 1917 after the February Revolution; however, certain leaders of the White movement like Baron Peter Wrangel and Roman von Ungern-Sternberg continued to use the title until the end of the Russian Civil War.
Spain.
In Spain the title follows "Vizconde" in the noble hierarchy, and ranks above "Señor". "Baronesa" is the feminine form, for the wife of a baron or for a woman who has been granted the title in her own right. In general, titles of "baron" created before the nineteenth century originate from the Crown of Aragon. "Barons" lost territorial jurisdiction around the middle of the nineteenth century, and from then on the title became purely honorific. Although most "barons" have not held the rank of grandeza as well, the title has been conferred in conjunction with the "grandeza". The sovereign continues to grant baronial titles.
United Kingdom and the Commonwealth.
In the Peerage of England, Peerage of Ireland, Peerage of Great Britain and the Peerage of the United Kingdom, barons form the lowest rank, placed immediately below viscounts. A female of baronial rank has the title baroness. In the kingdom of England, the medieval Latin word ", baronis" was used originally to denote a tenant-in-chief of the early Norman kings who held his lands by the feudal tenure of "barony" (in Latin "per baroniam"), and who was entitled to attend the Great Council (Magnum Concilium) which by the 13th century had developed into the Parliament of England.
Feudal baronies (or "baronies by tenure") are now obsolete in England and without any legal force but any such historical titles are held "in gross", that is to say are deemed to be enveloped within a more modern extant peerage title also held by the holder, sometimes along with vestigial manorial rights and tenures by grand serjeanty.
William I introduced the rank of "baron" in England to distinguish those men who had pledged their loyalty to him under the feudal system. Previously, in the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of England, the king's companions held the title of earl and in Scotland, the title of thane. All who held their feudal barony "in-chief of the king", that is with the king as his immediate overlord, became alike "barones regis" ("barons of the king"), bound to perform a stipulated annual military service, and obliged to attend his council. Eventually the greatest of the nobles, especially those in the marches, such as the Earls of Chester or the Bishops of Durham, whose territories were often deemed palatine, that is to say "worthy of a prince", might refer to their own tenants as "barons", where lesser magnates spoke simply of their "men" ("homines").
Initially those who held land directly from the king by military service, from earls downwards, all bore alike the title of baron, which was thus the factor uniting all members of the ancient baronage as peers one of another. Under King Henry II, the "Dialogus de Scaccario" already distinguished between greater barons, who held "per baroniam" by knight's service, and lesser barons, who held manors. Technically, Lords of Manors are barons, or freemen, however they are not entitled to be styled as such. John Selden in his esteemed work "Titles of Honour" writes, "The word "Baro" (Latin for Baron) hath been also so much communicated, that not only all Lords of Mannors have been from antient time, and are at this day called sometimes Barons (as in the stile of their Court Barons, which is "Curia Baronis, &c". And I have read "hors de son Barony" in a barr to an Avowry for "hors de son fee") But also the Judges of the Exchequer have it from antient time fixed on them." Within a century of the Norman Conquest of 1066, as in the case of Thomas Becket in 1164, there arose the practice of sending to each greater baron a personal summons demanding his attendance at the King's Council, which evolved into the Parliament and later into the House of Lords, whilst as was stipulated in Magna Carta of 1215, the lesser barons of each county would receive a single summons as a group through the sheriff, and representatives only from their number would be elected to attend on behalf of the group. These representatives developed into the Knights of the Shire, elected by the County Court presided over by the sheriff, who themselves formed the precursor of the House of Commons. Thus appeared a definite distinction, which eventually had the effect of restricting to the greater barons alone the privileges and duties of peerage.
Later, the king started to create new baronies in one of two ways: by a writ of summons directing a chosen man to attend Parliament, and in an even later development by letters patent. Writs of summons became the normal method in medieval times, displacing the method of feudal barony, but creation of baronies by letters patent is the sole method adopted in modern times.
Since the adoption of summons by writ, baronies thus no longer relate directly to land-holding, and thus no more feudal baronies needed thenceforth to be created. Following the "Modus Tenendi Parliamenta" of 1419, the Tenures Abolition Act 1660, the Feudal Tenure Act (1662), and the Fines and Recoveries Act of 1834, titles of feudal barony became obsolete and without legal force. The Abolition Act 1660 specifically states: baronies by tenure were converted into baronies by writ. The rest ceased to exist as feudal baronies by tenure, becoming baronies in free socage, that is to say under a "free" (hereditable) contract requiring payment of monetary rents.
In the twentieth-century Britain introduced the concept of non-hereditary life peers. All appointees to this distinction have (thus far) been at the rank of baron. In accordance with the tradition applied to hereditary peers they too are formally addressed in parliament by their peers as "The Noble Lord".
In addition, baronies are often used by their holders as subsidiary titles, for example as courtesy titles for the son and heir of an Earl or higher-ranked peer. The Scottish baronial title tends to be used when a landed family is not in possession of any United Kingdom peerage title of higher rank, subsequently granted, or has been created a knight of the realm.
Several members of the royal family with the style of "Royal Highness" are also titled Barons. For example, Charles, Prince of Wales also is The Baron of Renfrew. His eldest son Prince William, Duke of Cambridge is also The Baron Carrickfergus. Similarly Prince Andrew, Duke of York is The Baron Killyleagh.
Some non-royal Barons are somehow related to the royal family, for example Maurice Roche, 6th Baron Fermoy is William's first cousin once removed, through William's late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, who was the 4th Baron Fermoy's granddaughter.
Scotland.
In Scotland, the rank of baron is a rank of the ancient feudal nobility of Scotland and refers to a holder of a feudal barony, formerly a feudal superiority over a proper territorial entity erected into a free barony by a Crown Charter this being the status of a minor baron, recognized by the crown as noble, but not a peer.
The Court of Lord Lyon will officially recognise feudal barons or those possessing the dignity of baron who meet certain criteria, and will grant them arms with a helmet befitting their degree. Scottish barons rank below Lords of Parliament and while noble have the status of minor baron, being a non-Peerage rank; as such it can be transferred by either inheritance or conveyance.
In showing that Scottish barons are titles of nobility, reference may be made, amongst others, to the Lyon Court in the Petition of Maclean of Ardgour for a Birthbrieve by Interlocutor dated 26 February 1943 which "Finds and Declares that the Minor Barons of Scotland are, and have both in this Nobiliary Court, and in the Court of Session, been recognised as 'titled' nobility, and that the estait of the Baronage (The Barones Minores) is of the ancient Feudal Nobility of Scotland".
Sir Thomas Innes of Learney in his 'Scots Heraldry' (2nd Ed., p. 88, note 1) states that 'The Act 1672, cap 47, specially qualifies the degrees thus: Nobles (i.e. peers, the term being here used in a restricted seventeenth-century English sense), Barons (i.e. Lairds of baronial fiefs and their "heirs", who, even if fiefless, are equivalent to heads of Continental baronial houses) and Gentlemen (apparently all other armigers).' Baronets and knights are evidently classed as 'Gentlemen' here and are of a lower degree than Barons.
The Scottish equivalent of an English baron is a Lord of Parliament.
Style of address.
Normally one refers to or addresses Baron as "Lord [X" and his wife as "Lady name="pine"/> Women who hold baronies in their own right may be styled as "Baroness [X", or "Lady In direct address, they can also be referred to as "My Lord", "Your Lordship", or "Your Ladyship", but "never" as "My Lady" (except in the case of a female judge). Husband(s) of a Baroness in her own right are not conferred any elevated style in their right. Children of Barons and Baronesses in their own right, whether hereditary or for life, have the style "The Honourable [Forename ". After the death of the father or mother, the child may continue to use the style "The Honourable".
Scottish barons style their surnames similarly to Clan Chiefs, with the name of their barony following their name, as in "John Smith of Edinburgh" or "John Smith, Baron of Edinburgh". Most formally, and in writing, they are styled as "The Much Honoured Baron of Edinburgh". Their wives are styled " Lady Edinburgh", or "The Baroness of Edinburgh". The phrase "Lady of Edinburgh" is wrong if the lady in question does not hold a Scottish barony in her own right. Orally, Scottish barons may be addressed with the name of their barony, as in "Edinburgh" or else as "Baron" without anything else following, which if present would suggest a peerage barony. Informally, when referring to a Scots feudal baron in the third person, the name "Baron of is used or simply "[X".
The United Kingdom policy of using titles on passports requires that the applicant provides evidence that the Lord Lyon has recognised a feudal barony, or the title is included in Burke's Peerage. If accepted (and if the applicant wishes to include the title), the correct form is for the applicant to include the territorial designation as part of their surname (of [territorial designation; e.g. Smith of Inverglen). The Observation would then show the holder's full name, followed by their feudal title e.g. The holder is John Smith, Baron of Inverglen
Non-Scottish barons are styled "The Right Honourable The Lord name="pine"/> Barons' wives are styled "The Right Honourable The Lady [Barony". Baronesses in their own right, whether hereditary or for life, are either styled "The Right Honourable The Baroness or "The Right Honourable The Lady [Barony", mainly based on personal preference (e.g., Margaret, Lady Thatcher and Brenda, Baroness Hale, both created baronesses in their own right for life). Note the order of the names: 'Lady Margaret Thatcher' would denote that she were the daughter of an earl, marquess or duke and, in the case of men, 'Lord Digby Jones' would denote that he were the younger son of a marquess or duke, and should be properly styled Digby, Lord Jones. "The" "Right Honourable" is frequently abbreviated to "The Rt Hon." or "Rt Hon." When referred to by the Sovereign in public instruments, "The Right Honourable" is changed to "Our right trusty and well-beloved", with "Counsellor" attached if they are a Privy Counsellor.
Courtesy barons are styled "Lord and their wives "Lady [Barony": the article "The" is always absent; if the courtesy baron is not a Privy Counsellor, the style "The Right Honourable" will also be absent.
Coronet.
A person holding a peerage in the rank of baron is entitled to a coronet bearing six silver balls (called pearls) around the rim, equally spaced and all of equal size and height. The rim itself is neither jeweled, nor "chased" (which is the case for the coronets of peers of higher degree).
The actual coronet is mostly worn on certain ceremonial occasions, such as the coronation of a new monarch, but a baron can bear his coronet of rank on his coat of arms above the shield. In heraldry, the baron's coronet is shown with four of the balls visible.
Scottish feudal barons were entitled to a red cap of maintenance (chapeau) turned up ermine if petitioning for a grant or matriculation of a coat of arms between the 1930s and 2004. This chapeau is identical to the red cap worn by an English baron, but without the silver balls or gilt. This is sometimes depicted in armorial paintings between the shield and the helmet. Additionally, if the baron is the head of a family he may include a chiefly coronet which is similar to a ducal coronet, but with four strawberry leaves. Because the chapeau was a relatively recent innovation, a number of ancient Arms of Scottish feudal barons do not display the chapeau. Now Scottish barons are principally recognised by the baron's helm, which in Scotland is a steel helmet with grille of three grilles, garnished in gold. Occasionally the great tilting-helm garnished with gold is shown, or a helmet befitting a higher rank, if held.
Other.
Like other major Western noble titles, "baron" is sometimes used to render certain titles in non-Western languages with their own traditions, even though they are necessarily historically unrelated and thus hard to compare, which are considered 'equivalent' in relative rank.
This is the case with China's "nanjue" ("nan-chueh") (), hereditary title of nobility of the fifth rank, as well as its derivatives and adaptations:
In some "republics" of continental Europe, the unofficial title of "Baron" retains a purely social prestige, with no particular political privileges.
In Armenian, the word "Baron" should not be confused with the similar word "Paron" (Armenian: Պարոն), which is a title given to ordinary men, equivalent to 'Sir' or 'Mr'.
In the Polynesian island monarchy of Tonga, as opposed to the situation in Europe, barons are granted this imported title (in English), alongside traditional chiefly styles, and continue to hold and exercise some political power.

</doc>
<doc id="79917" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79917" title="Curetes">
Curetes

The term Curetes (; Greek "Κουρῆτες") may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79918" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79918" title="Galli">
Galli

A Gallus (pl. Galli) was a eunuch priest of the Phrygian goddess Cybele and her consort Attis, whose worship was incorporated into the state religious practices of ancient Rome.
About the Galli.
The first Galli arrived in Rome when the Senate officially adopted Cybele as a state goddess in 204 BC. Roman citizens were prohibited from becoming Galli, which meant that they were all orientals or slaves. Under Claudius, this ban was lifted. Eventually Domitian reaffirmed that Roman citizens were forbidden to practice "eviratio" (castration).
The Galli castrated themselves during an ecstatic celebration called the Dies sanguinis, or "Day of Blood", which took place on March 24. At the same time they put on women's costume, mostly yellow in colour, and a sort of turban, together with pendants and ear-rings. They also wore their hair long, and bleached, and wore heavy make-up. They wandered around with followers, begging for charity, in return for which they were prepared to tell fortunes. On the day of mourning for Attis they ran around wildly and disheveled. They performed dances to the music of pipes and tambourines, and, in an ecstasy, flogged themselves until they bled.
Origins of the name.
Stephanus Byzantinus said that the name came from King Gallus. Ovid (43 BC - 17 AD) says that the name is derived from the Gallus river in Phrygia. 
While these efforts at "folk" etymologies were widespread in classical times, it has been suggested that "gallu" comes from the Sumerian "Gal" meaning "great" and "Lu" meaning "man", humans or sexually ambivalent demons that freed Inanna from the underworld. They originally seem to have been consecrated to the god Enki.
By coincidence there was a category of Mesopotamian priests called "kalu"; in Sumerian "gala". These priests played the "tympanum" and were involved in bull sacrifice. Another category of Mesopotamian priests called "assinnu", "galatur", and "kurgarru" had a sacred function. These transgender or eunuch priests participated in liturgical rites, during which they were costumed and masked. They played music, sang, and danced, most often in ceremonies dedicated to the goddess Ishtar.
The Galli and Attis.
Fundamental to understanding the meaning and the function of the myth and ritual related to Attis in Rome is his relationship with the Galli. The role of prototype of the mythical castration of Attis for the institution of the "priesthood" of the Galli has almost always been emphasised, even if to different degrees. Scholars have attempted to draw a connection between the episode of the castration of Attis and the ritual mutilation of the Galli as a reflection in myth of a secondary ritual action or conversely, as the mythical foundation of a ritual action. This kind of interpretation appears to be too simplistic as, to some extent, it fails to consider that this connection has served different purposes in different periods. The emasculation of Attis in the "Phrygian" version of the myth is the basis for an institution that is both political and religious, the institution of his priests in Pessinous, the "non-kings", who don't simply coincide with the Galli.
The earliest references to the Galli come from the Anthologia Palatina although they don't explicitly mention emasculation. More interesting is the fragment attributed to Callimachus, in which the term "Gallai" denotes castration that has taken place.
Archigallus.
The high priests are well-documented from archaeology. At Pessinus, the centre of the Cybele cult, there were two high priests during the Hellenistic period, one with the title of "Attis" and the other with the name of "Battakes". Both were eunuchs. The high priests had considerable political influence during this period, and letters exist from a high priest Attis to the kings of Pergamon, Eumenes II and Attalus II, inscribed on stone. Later, during the Flavian period, there was a college of ten priests, not castrated, and now Roman citizens, but still using the title "Attis".
In Rome, the head of the galli was known as the "archigallus", at least from the period of Claudius on. A number of archaeological finds depict the archigallus wearing luxurious and extravagant costumes. The archigallus was always a Roman citizen chosen by the quindecimviri sacris faciundis, whose term of service lasted for life.
Being a Roman citizen, as well as being employed by the Roman State, meant that the archigallus had to preserve the traditions of Cybele's cult while not violating Roman prohibitions in religious behavior. Hence, some argue that the archigallus was never a eunuch, as all citizens of Rome were forbidden from emasculation. However, under Claudius Roman citizens were permitted to be castrated up until the reign of Domitian. The signs of his office have been described as a type of crown, possibly a laurel wreath, as well as a golden bracelet known as the occabus.
Along with the institution of the archigallus came the Phrygianum sanctuary as well as the rite of the taurobolium as it pertains to the Magna Mater, two aspects of the Magna Mater’s cultus that the archigallus held dominion over.
Literature.
To thee, my mother Rhea, nurse of Phrygian lions, whose devotees tread the heights of Dindymus, did womanish Alexis, ceasing from furious clashing of the brass, dedicate these stimulants of his madness— his shrill-toned cymbals, the noise of his deep-voiced flute, to which the crooked horn of a younger steer gave a curved form, his echoing tambourines, his knives reddened with blood, and the yellow hair which once tossed on his shoulders. Be kind, O Queen, and give rest in his old age from his former wildness to him who went mad in his youth.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 51
Clytosthenes, his feet that raced in fury now enfeebled by age, dedicates to thee, Rhea of the lion-ear, his tambourines beaten by the hand, his shrill hollow-rimmed cymbals, his double-flute that calls through its horn, on which he once made shrieking music, twisting his neck about, and the two-edged knife with which he opened his veins.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 94
The priest of Rhea, when taking shelter from the winter snow-storm he entered the lonely cave, had just wiped the snow off his hair, when following on his steps came a lion, devourer of cattle, into the hollow way. But he with outspread hand beat the great tambour he held and the whole cave rang with the sound. Nor did that woodland beast dare to support the holy boom of Cybele, but rushed straight up the forest-clad hill, in dread of the half-girlish servant of the goddess, who hath dedicated to her these robes and this his yellow hair.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 217
A begging eunuch priest of Cybele was wandering through the upland forests of Ida, and there met him a huge lion, its hungry throat dreadfully gaping as though to devour him. Then in fear of the death that faced him in its raving jaws, he beat his tambour from the holy grove. The lion shut its murderous mouth, and as if itself full of divine frenzy, began to toss and whirl its mane about its neck. But he thus escaping a dreadful death dedicated to Rhea the beast that had taught itself her dance.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 218
Goaded by the fury of the dreadful goddess, tossing his locks in wild frenzy, clothed in woman's raiment with well-plaited tresses and a dainty netted hair-caul, a eunuch once took shelter in a mountain cavern, driven by the numbing snow of Zeus. But behind him rushed in unshivering a lion, slayer of bulls, returning to his den in the evening, who looking on the man, snuffing in his shapely nostrils the smell of human flesh, stood still on his sturdy feet, but rolling his eyes roared loudly from his greedy jaws. The cave, his den, thunders around him and the wooded peak that mounts nigh to the clouds echoes loud. But the priest startled by the deep voice felt all his stirred spirit broken in his breast. Yet he uttered from his lips the piercing shriek they use, and tossed his whirling locks, and holding up his great tambour, the revolving instrument of Olympian Rhea, he beat it, and it was the saviour of his life; for the lion hearing the unaccustomed hollow boom of the bull's hide was afraid and took to flight. See how all-wise necessity taught a means of escape from death!
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 219
Chaste Atys, the gelded servant of Cybele, in frenzy giving his wild hair to the wind, wished to reach Sardis from Phrygian Pessinus; but when the dark of evening fell upon him in his course, the fierce fervour of his bitter ecstasy was cooled and he took shelter in a descending cavern, turning aside a little from the road. But a lion came swiftly on his track, a terror to brave men and to him an inexpressible woe. He stood speechless from fear and by some divine inspiration put his hand to his sounding tambour. At its deep roar the most courageous of beasts ran off quicker than a deer, unable to bear the deep note in its ears, and he cried out, "Great Mother, by the banks of the Sangarius I dedicate to thee, in thanks for my life, my holy "thalame" and this noisy instrument that caused the lion to fly."
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 220
The long-haired priest of Rhea, the newly gelded, the dancer from Lydian Tmolus whose shriek is heard afar, dedicates, now he rests from his frenzy, to the solemn Mother who dwells by the banks of Sangarius these tambourines, his scourge armed with bones, these noisy brazen cymbals, and a scented lock of his hair.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 234
The priest of Rhea dedicated to the mountain-Mother of the gods this raiment and these locks owing to an adventure such as this. As he was walking alone in the wood a savage lion met him and a struggle for his life was imminent. But the goddess put it in his mind to beat his tambourine and he made the ravening brute take flight, dreading the awful din. For this reason his locks hang from the whistling branches.
"Greek Anthology", Book VI, 237

</doc>
<doc id="79922" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79922" title="Corycian Cave">
Corycian Cave

The Corycian Cave (; "Korykion antron") is located on the slopes of Mount Parnassus, in Greece. In the mythology of the area, it is named after the nymph Corycia; however, its name etymologically derives from "korykos", "knapsack". A modern name for the cave in some references is "Sarantavli", meaning "forty rooms". This cave was sacred to the Corycian Nymphs and the Muses, and a place of worship for Pan.
Strabo, in his "Geography", writes:
An excavation by French archaeologists in 1969 produced a plethora of objects of antiquity including a rare Neolithic male figurine, Mycenean shards, bone flutes, iron and bronze rings, miniature bronze statues, 50,000 terracotta figurines from the classical period and 24,000 astragaloi, or "knucklebones" (used for astragalomancy, or "prophecy by knucklebones").
Traditionally the cave has been a place of refuge for the surrounding population during foreign invasions e.g. from the Persians (Herodotus, 8.36) in the 5th century BC, the Turks during the Greek War of Independence, and from the Germans in 1943.
King Otto and Queen Amalia made a royal tour with 100 torchbearers to view the two chambers of the cavern which is enormous at 60 m long, 26 m wide and 12 m high.
Pausanias in his "Guide to Greece" writes:

</doc>
<doc id="79925" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79925" title="Oenone">
Oenone

In Greek mythology, Oenone (; Greek: "Oinōnē - Οἰνώνη" "wine woman") was the first wife of Paris of Troy, whom he abandoned for the queen Helen of Sparta.
Oenone was a mountain nymph (an oread) on Mount Ida in Phrygia, a mountain associated with the Mother Goddess Cybele, alternatively Rhea. Her father was Cebren, a river-god. Her very name links her to the gift of wine.
Paris, son of the king Priam and the queen Hecuba, fell in love with Oenone when he was a shepherd on the slopes of Mount Ida, having been exposed in infancy (owing to a prophecy that he would be the means of the destruction of the city of Troy) but rescued by the herdsman Agelaus. The couple married, and Oenone gave birth to a son, Corythus.
When Paris later abandoned her to return to Troy and sail across the Aegean to kidnap Helen, the queen of Sparta, Oenone predicted the Trojan War. Out of revenge for Paris' betrayal, she sent Corythus to guide the Greeks to Troy. Another version has it that she used her son to drive a rift between Paris and Helen, but Paris, not recognizing his own son, killed him.
The only extensive surviving narration of Oenone and Paris is Quintus Smyrnaeus, "Posthomerica", book X.259-489, which tells the return of wounded Paris to Oenone. Mortally wounded by Philoctetes' arrow, he begged Oenone to heal him with her herbal arts, but she refused and cast him out with scorn, to return to Helen's bed, and Paris died on the lower slopes of Ida. Then, overcome with remorse, Oenone, the one whole-hearted mourner of Paris, threw herself onto his burning funeral pyre, which the shepherds had raised. A fragment of Bacchylides suggests that she threw herself off a cliff, in "Bibliotheke" it is noted "when she found him dead she hanged herself," and Lycophron imagined her hurtling head first from the towering walls of Troy. Her tragic story makes one of the "Love Romances" of Parthenius of Nicaea.
Ovid includes an imagined reproachful letter from Oenone to Paris in his collection "Heroides", a text that has been extended by a number of spurious post-Ovidian interpolations, which include a rape of Oenone by Apollo that is nowhere confirmed in other sources.
In literature.
"Oenone and Paris" (1594) is an epyllion by Thomas Heywood. Lawrence Binyon published a one-act closet tragedy in blank verse "Paris and Oenone" in 1906. William Morris retold Paris's pleading Oenone to heal him in "The Death of Paris" in "The Earthly Paradise".
Tennyson adapted Quintus' treatment of the theme for "The death of Oenone" (1892), distilling its tragic essence. This was Tennyson's second attempt at a poem on this subject; his previous, 1829 attempt, "Œnone", was critically panned.
Oenone is also mentioned in H.D.'s book-length poem, "Helen in Egypt".
Letitia Landon includes a villa 'on whose frescoed walls was painted the story of Œnone' in "Giulietta - A tale of the Fourteenth Century".

</doc>
<doc id="79926" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79926" title="Corythus">
Corythus

Corythus is the name of six mortal men in Greek mythology.

</doc>
<doc id="79931" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79931" title="Baptes">
Baptes

The Baptes (Greek βάπτης) were priests of the Greek goddess Cottytus. The word comes from the Greek verb βάπτω ("baptō"), meaning "to dip in water". The Baptes practised obscene ceremonies at night; they included orgies so hedonistic that even Cottytus herself was disgusted.
References.
"This article incorporates text from" Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable "by E. Cobham Brewer (1894), a publication now in the public domain".

</doc>
<doc id="79932" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79932" title="Kratos (mythology)">
Kratos (mythology)

In Greek mythology, Kratos or Cratus (Ancient Greek: Κράτος, English translation: "State") is the son of Pallas and Styx and the personification of authority in all its forms. Kratos and his siblings—Nike ("victory"), Bia ("force/violence"), and Zelus ("zeal")—are the winged enforcers (sky tides) of the Olympian God Zeus. He makes an appearance in Aeschylus's "Prometheus Bound", in which he is one of the trio that binds the titular Titan, the other two being Hephaestus and Bia.

</doc>
<doc id="79935" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79935" title="Desire (DC Comics)">
Desire (DC Comics)

Desire is a fictional character from the DC comic book series "The Sandman" (1988–1996). The character, one of the Endless, first appeared in "The Sandman" vol. 2, #1 (November 1989), and was created by Neil Gaiman and Mike Dringenberg.
Publication history.
Desire is first featured in the second issue of "" (the second trade paperback collecting "The Sandman" series). Gaiman claims to have drawn inspiration for Desire from "the sexy, androgynous" prints created by Patrick Nagel in the 1980s, and Annie Lennox circa 1987 while she was a member of Eurythmics. Dringenberg recalls differences he and Gaiman had in their view of Desire's visual appearance. While Gaiman saw Desire as being somewhere between David Bowie and Annie Lennox, Dringenberg saw them more in terms of Duran Duran (what he describes as "sort of two-dimensional and slightly vapid"). Dringenberg also cites his then girlfriend as being a visual inspiration for Desire; rendering the character in her likeness but with very short hair. Dringenberg points out the primary difference between their vision for Desire being that Gaiman's idea for the character was essentially sexless and unsatisfying. Dringenberg, on the other hand, saw it as being omni-sexual and perennially tempting. According to Dringenberg, his vision calls for a Desire with breasts and a bulge between its legs, and Gaiman's calls for nothing. Gaiman agrees with Dringenberg's view by explaining that Desire had to be made both male and female, because the character represents everything someone might desire. He adds that Desire being both male and female (or neither male nor female) provides symmetry to the Endless family: three males (Destiny, Dream, and Destruction), three females (Death, Despair, and Delirium), and Desire.
Todd Klein was asked to develop unique lettering styles for many of the main characters featured in "The Sandman" series. When he designed the typeface used for Desire's lettering, he rendered the letters in the style of Art Nouveau posters and ads to correspond with its Patrick Nagel visuals.
When Desire is first introduced in "The Doll's House", it is shown within the Threshold: a giant, flesh and blood replica of itself which it calls home. Gaiman admits that he stole the name for the Threshold from a story Clive Barker had been planning to do in which Gaiman was going to be included as a character. He liked the name because "threshold" contains "hold", meaning home or fortress. The idea for Desire living in its own body came from Gaiman deciding that desire lives under the skin. The conclusion of "The Doll's House" culminates in a confrontation between Dream and Desire. The reader has learned that Desire rapes Unity Kinkaid as part of a plot to ensnare its brother Dream. During an interview, Hy Bender asks Gaiman why Desire sleeping with a mortal woman isn't against a rule in DC continuity stating that the Endless aren't allowed to mate with mortals. Gaiman corrects him by pointing out that the rule is that the Endless cannot "love" mortals, and that rape is something altogether different. He goes on to point out that these plot devices help set up the Dream versus Desire conflict that spans "The Sandman" series. Bender also asks Gaiman about Desire appearing as an antagonist in "The Sandman". Gaiman explains that Desire's role as a "villain" is due to its personality conflict with Dream. With Dream being the main character of the series, Desire was shortchanged. He goes on to say that if he were to write "Desire Comics", that readers would have seen Dream in more of an antagonist role.
Desire's appearances are largely relegated to "The Sandman" series and related works. Desire also makes cameo appearances in "Winter's Edge" #1 and #3, a holiday title published by Vertigo.
Fictional character biography.
Desire is the third youngest of the Endless and the twin of Despair. It is a strikingly beautiful figure whose gender is mutable, becoming male, female, both, or neither as the situation warrants. It is often referred to as "sibling" by its brethren, particularly Dream. Desire blends in effortlessly with whatever environment it finds itself in. It lives in the heart of a massive flesh-and-blood statue of itself, known as the Threshold. Indeed, further strengthening the connection to hearts, Desire's sigil in the galleries of the other Endless is a heart of cut glass.
Desire is described as being of medium height, smelling faintly of summer peaches. Desire casts two shadows, one black and sharp, the other translucent and wavering. Desire's smiles are brief and sharp. Its skin is "pale as smoke," and its eyes are "tawny and sharp as yellow wine."
Desire is easily the cruelest of the Endless. It seems obsessed with interfering with the affairs of its elder siblings, particularly Dream. The motivation behind this is not clear.
A story in "", set long before any other "Sandman" story, explains the origins of the Desire/Dream enmity, and reveals that before this Desire was Dream's favorite sibling. Dream had fallen in love with a mortal, Killalla of the Glow, and had taken her to a gathering of stars (literally the embodiments of various suns). While there, Killalla met and fell in love with the star of her own home world, abandoning Dream. Desire's role in this is never made clear (except that love is obviously a form of desire). After introducing his lover to Desire when it first arrives, and leaving the two alone, Killalla asked what Desire had done for Dream to make him so affectionate, but Desire indicated that it hadn't done anything at all. Later, however, when Dream angrily blames Desire for the whole affair, Desire offers no defense, only asking Destruction after Morpheus storms off, "Doesn't he have a sense of humor?" This story, set billions of years before the story-arc of The Sandman, tends to portray the characters in a very different light, showing that even the Endless are not unchanging, with Desire's attitude towards Dream being playful rather than malicious during this early encounter.
The enmity between Dream and Desire continued through the millennia, eventually culminating in Desire raping and fathering a child on Unity Kinkaid, then attempting to have Dream kill Rose Walker, Unity's grandchild, which would have caused the ruthless and relentless Furies to hound Dream until he died for the crime of shedding family blood. When Dream discovered this at the end of "The Doll's House", he openly threatened Desire with what would happen should Desire interfere in Dream's life again, and there was an uneasy truce between the two afterwards.
In The Sandman: Overture, Dream is forced to save the universe from the result of a dream vortex he failed to destroy. Along the way he is helped by an aspect of himself in the form of a giant cat. The cat is later revealed to be Desire in disguise, as Desire knew Dream would only accept help from himself. The result of the universe's restoration causes Desire to forget that it helped Dream.
In other media.
Tori Amos, a well-known friend of Gaiman's, included a song titled "Sister Named Desire" as a B-Side for her single "Talula". The song was rerecorded for a tribute album to Gaiman that was assembled by the Dancing Ferret entertainment group titled "Where's Neil When You Need Him?" (named after a line from Amos' song "Space Dog").

</doc>
<doc id="79936" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79936" title="Zelus">
Zelus

In Greek mythology, Zelus or Zelos (Greek: Ζῆλος, "Zēlos", literally "zeal") was the son of Pallas and Styx. Zelus and siblings Nike (Victory), Kratos (Strength) and Bia (Force) were winged enforcers who stood in attendance at Zeus' throne and formed part of his retinue.
Zelus personifies dedication, emulation, eager rivalry, envy, jealousy, and zeal. The English word "zeal" is derived from his name.
Zelos may have also been identified with Agon, and was closely connected with Eris.

</doc>
<doc id="79937" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79937" title="Ford Escort">
Ford Escort

Ford Escort may refer to one of several vehicles manufactured by Ford Motor Company:

</doc>
<doc id="79938" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79938" title="Crinisus">
Crinisus

"This is also the name of a river in Sicily, the River Crinisus."
Crinisus was a god in Roman mythology. According to Virgil's "Aeneid" (5.38) and Hyginus' "Fabulae" (273), Crinisus was the father of Acestes by a Dardanian woman.

</doc>
<doc id="79939" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79939" title="Cebren">
Cebren

Cebren was a Greek river-god, whose river was located near Troy. He was the son of Oceanus and Tethys and he was the father of Asterope, Hesperia, who are sometimes considered to be each other, and Oenone. The city Cebrene (also spelled Kebrene or Kevrin) was named for Cebren.

</doc>
<doc id="79940" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79940" title="Crius">
Crius

In Greek mythology, Crius, Kreios or Krios (, Κριός) was one of the Titans in the list given in Hesiod's "Theogony", a son of Uranus and Gaia. The least individualized among the Titans he was overthrown in the Titanomachy. M. L. West has suggested how Hesiod filled out the complement of Titans from the core group—adding three figures from the archaic tradition of Delphi, Coeus, and Phoibe, whose name Apollo assumed with the oracle, and Themis. Among possible further interpolations among the Titans was Crius, whose interest for Hesiod was as the father of Perses and grandfather of Hecate, for whom Hesiod was, according to West, an "enthusiastic evangelist". 
Consorting with Eurybia, daughter of Earth (Gaia) and Sea (Pontus), he fathered Astraios and Pallas as well as Perses. The joining of Astraios with Eos, the Dawn, brought forth Eosphoros, the other Stars and the Winds.
Joined to fill out lists of Titans to form a total that made a match with the Twelve Olympians, Crius was inexorably involved in the ten-year-long war between the Olympian gods and Titans, the Titanomachy, though without any specific part to play. When the war was lost, Crius was banished along with the others to the lower level of Hades called Tartarus. 
Although "krios" was also the ancient Greek word for "ram", the Titan's chthonic position in the Underworld means no classical association with Aries, the "Ram" of the zodiac, is ordinarily made. Aries is the first visible constellation in the sky at the spring season, marking the start of the new year in the ancient Greek calendar. This fact may have implied that Crius was the Titan god of constellations, measuring the duration of the year while his brother Hyperion measures the days and months.

</doc>
<doc id="79941" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79941" title="Duke of Cornwall">
Duke of Cornwall

Duke of Cornwall is a title in the Peerage of England, traditionally held by the eldest son of the reigning British monarch, previously the English monarch. The Duchy of Cornwall was the first duchy created in England and was established by royal charter in 1337. The present duke is the Prince of Wales, the eldest son of Queen Elizabeth II. His wife, Camilla, is the current Duchess.
History.
Some folkloric histories of the British Isles, such as Geoffrey of Monmouth's "History of the Kings of Britain" (1136), claim that the first leader of Cornwall was Corineus, a Trojan warrior and ally of Brutus of Troy, the original settler of the British Isles. From this earliest period through the Arthurian period, the legendary Dukes of Cornwall are semi-autonomous if not independent from the High-King or ruler of Britain, while also serving as his closest ally and, at times, as his protector. According to legend, Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall under King Uther Pendragon, rebelled against the latter's rule when the king became obsessed with Gorlois' wife Igraine. Uther killed Gorlois and took Igraine: the result of their union was the future King Arthur.
The historical record suggests that, following the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain, Cornwall formed part of the separate Kingdom of Dumnonia, which included Devon, although there is evidence that it may have had its own rulers at times. The southwest of Britain was gradually incorporated into the emerging Kingdom of England, and after the Norman Conquest in 1066 the new rulers of England appointed their own men as Earl of Cornwall, the first of whom was in fact a Breton of 'Cornwall' in Brittany. Edward, the Black Prince, the eldest son of Edward III, was made the first Duke of Cornwall in 1337. After Edward predeceased the King, the duchy was recreated for his son, the future Richard II. Under a charter of 1421, the duchy passes to the sovereign's eldest son. Cornwall was the first dukedom conferred within the Kingdom of England.
Succession.
The dukedom of Cornwall can only be held by the oldest living son of the monarch who is also heir apparent. In the event of a Duke of Cornwall's death, the title merges in the Crown even if he left surviving descendants. The monarch's grandson, even if he is the heir apparent, does not succeed to the dukedom. Similarly, no female may ever be Duke of Cornwall, even if she is heir presumptive or heir apparent (that being a distinct and even likely possibility in the future after the passage of the Succession to the Crown Act 2013) to the throne. However, if a Duke of Cornwall should die without descendants and has no elder sister, his next brother obtains the duchy, this brother being "both" oldest living son and heir apparent.
It is possible for an individual to be Prince of Wales and heir apparent without being Duke of Cornwall. The title "Prince of Wales" is the traditional title of the heir apparent to the throne, granted at the discretion of the Sovereign, and is not restricted to the eldest son.
For example, King George II's heir apparent, the future George III, was Prince of Wales, but not Duke of Cornwall (because he was the King's grandson, not the King's son). When the Sovereign has no legitimate son, the estates of the Duchy of Cornwall revert to the Crown until a legitimate son is born to the Sovereign or until the accession of a new Sovereign who has a son (e.g. between 1547 and 1603) (see more below).
James Francis Edward Stuart, son of James II, was born Duke of Cornwall in 1688. Although his father lost the throne, James Francis Edward was not deprived of his own honours. On a Jacobite perspective, on his father's death in 1701 the duchy of Cornwall was merged in the Crown. On a Hanoverian perspective, it was as a result of his claiming his father's lost thrones that James was attainted for treason on 2 March 1702, and his titles were thus forfeited under English law.
The current Duke of Cornwall.
The current Duke of Cornwall is Charles, Prince of Wales, eldest son of Queen Elizabeth II, the reigning monarch. Charles was officially proclaimed Duke of Cornwall at Launceston Castle in 1973. As part of his feudal dues there was a pair of white gloves, gilt spurs and greyhounds, a pound of pepper and cumin, a bow, one hundred silver shillings, wood for his fires, and a salmon spear.
The Duke's second wife, Camilla, whom he married on 9 April 2005 at the Guildhall in Windsor, is the current Duchess of Cornwall. She is also Princess of Wales but does not use that title.
Rights of the duke.
Should there be no Duke of Cornwall at any time, the income of the Duchy goes to the Crown. The Duchy includes over 570 square kilometres of land, more than half of which lies in Devon. The Duke also has some rights over the territory of Cornwall, the county, and for this and other reasons there is debate as to the constitutional status of Cornwall. The High Sheriff of Cornwall is appointed by the Duke, not the monarch, in contrast to the other counties of England and Wales. The Duke has the right to the estates of all those who die without named heirs (bona vacantia) in the whole of Cornwall. In 2013, the Duchy had a revenue surplus of ₤19 million, a sum that was exempt from income tax, though the Prince of Wales chose to pay the tax voluntarily.
Since the passing into law of the Sovereign Grant Act 2011, revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall pass to the heir to the throne, regardless of whether that heir is the Duke of Cornwall. In the event that the heir is a minor, 10% of the revenues pass to the heir, with the balance passing to the Crown.
Arms.
The Arms of the Duke of Cornwall are "sable, fifteen bezants", that is, a black field bearing fifteen golden discs. The arms are now used as a badge by the Prince of Wales, and they appear below the shield in his coat of arms, along with his other badges.
The arms were adopted late in the 15th century, based on the arms of Richard, Earl of Cornwall. The bezants in Richard's arms were intended to represent peas, known in French as "pois", as a punning reference to the French region of Poitou, of which he was count. 
The arms are sometimes shown surmounted by the Prince of Wales' coronet, which consists of four crosses patée and four fleurs-de-lis with an arch. The crest is a Cornish chough, and Cornish choughs holding ostrich feathers are found as supporters. The motto used with the arm is "Houmout", meaning "high-spirited", the personal motto of the Black Prince.
Dukes of Cornwall, 1337 creation.
All Dukes of Cornwall who have been the eldest living son of the sovereign are generally considered to have held the same "creation" of the dukedom. The following is a table of these Dukes of Cornwall, with the processes by which they became duke and by which they ceased to hold the title:
Additional details appear in Cokayne, George Edward, "The Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, Extant, Extinct or Dormant", A. Sutton, Gloucester, 1982. 13 volumes, published by The St. Catherine Press Ltd, London, England from 1910–1959; reprinted in microprint: 13 vol. in 6, Gloucester: A. Sutton, 1982
Dukes of Cornwall, 1376 creation.
When his heir apparent "Edward of Woodstock, Prince of Wales and Duke of Cornwall" predeceased him, Edward III granted Woodstock's son Richard a new creation of the title "Duke of Cornwall". When Richard acceded the throne as Richard II in 1377, this creation merged to the crown.
Dukes of Cornwall, 1460 creation.
When Richard Duke of York pressed his claim to the throne, he was made heir apparent to Henry VI by the Act of Accord. On 31 October 1460, he was made Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, Duke of Cornwall and Lord Protector of England by act of parliament. Since he was not the eldest living son of the monarch, this creation was outside the terms of the 1337 warrant; York died in battle on 30 December 1460.

</doc>
<doc id="79942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79942" title="Crime of apartheid">
Crime of apartheid

The crime of Apartheid is defined by the 2002 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as inhumane acts of a character similar to other crimes against humanity "committed in the context of an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups and committed with the intention of maintaining that regime."
On November 30, 1973, the United Nations General Assembly opened for signature and ratification the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. It defined the crime of apartheid as "inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing them."
History.
The term "", from Afrikaans for "apartness," was the official name of the South African system of racial segregation which existed after 1948. Complaints about the system were brought to the United Nations as early as 12 July 1948 when Dr. Padmanabha Pillai, the representative of India to the United Nations, circulated a letter to the Secretary-General expressing his concerns over treatment of ethnic Indians within the Union of South Africa. As it became more widely known, South African apartheid was condemned internationally as unjust and racist and many decided that a formal legal framework was needed in order to apply international pressure on the South African government.
In 1971, the USSR and Guinea together submitted early drafts of a convention to deal with the suppression and punishment of apartheid. In 1973, the General Assembly of the United Nations agreed on the text of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (ICSPCA). The Convention has 31 signatories and 107 parties.
The convention came into force in 1976 after 20 countries had ratified it. They were: Benin, Bulgaria, Belarus, Chad, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), Guinea, Hungary, Iraq, Mongolia, Poland, Qatar, Somalia, Syria, Ukraine, the USSR, the United Arab Emirates, Tanzania, Yugoslavia.
"As such, apartheid was declared to be a crime against humanity, with a scope that went far beyond South Africa. While the crime of apartheid is most often associated with the racist policies of South Africa after 1948, the term more generally refers to racially based policies in any state."
Seventy-six other countries subsequently signed on, but a number of nations, including western democracies, have neither signed nor ratified the ICSPCA, including Canada, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and the United States. In explanation of the US vote against the convention, Ambassador Clarence Clyde Ferguson Jr. said: "e cannot...accept that apartheid can in this manner be made a crime against humanity. Crimes against humanity are so grave in nature that they must be meticulously elaborated and strictly construed under existing international law..."
In 1977, Addition Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions designated apartheid as a grave breach of the Protocol and a war crime. There are 169 parties to the Protocol.
The International Criminal Court provides for individual criminal responsibility for crimes against humanity, including the crime of apartheid.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) came into being on 1 July 2002, and can only prosecute crimes committed on or after that date. The Court can generally only exercise jurisdiction in cases where the accused is a national of a state party, the alleged crime took place on the territory of a state party, or a situation is referred to the Court by the United Nations Security Council. The ICC exercises complimentary jurisdiction. Many of the member states have provided their own national courts with universal jurisdiction over the same offenses and do not recognize any statute of limitations for crimes against humanity. As of July 2008, 106 countries are states parties (with Suriname and Cook Islands set to join in October 2008), and a further 40 countries have signed but not yet ratified the treaty. However, many of the world's most populous nations, including China, India, the United States, Indonesia, and Pakistan are not parties to the Court and therefore are not subject to its jurisdiction, except by Security Council referral.
ICSPCA definition of the crime of apartheid.
Article II of the ICSPCA defines the crime of apartheid as below:
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid,
Article II
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term 'the crime of apartheid', which shall include similar policies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practiced in southern Africa, shall apply to the following inhumane acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing them:
Definition of racial discrimination.
According to the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
This definition does not make any difference between discrimination based on ethnicity and race, in part because the distinction between the two remains debatable among anthropologists. Similarly, in British law the phrase "racial group" means "any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin".
ICC definition of the crime of apartheid.
Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court defines crimes against humanity as:
Later in Article 7, the crime of apartheid is defined as:
The 'crime of apartheid' means inhumane acts of a character similar to those referred to in paragraph 1, committed in the context of an institutionalised regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups and committed with the intention of maintaining that regime.
Accusations of apartheid by country.
Israel.
Critics have accused Israel of committing the crime of apartheid; In a 2007 report, United Nations Special Rapporteur for Palestine John Dugard stated that "elements of the of Israel's occupation constitute forms of colonialism and of apartheid, which are contrary to international law." and suggested that the "legal consequences of a prolonged occupation with features of colonialism and apartheid" be put to the International Court of Justice.
In 2010, Richard Falk, the next UN Special Rapporteur for Palestine concludes that this "general structure of apartheid that exists in the Occupied Palestinian Territories ... makes the allegation increasingly credible despite the differences between the specific characteristics of South African apartheid and that of the Occupied Palestinian Territories regime".
South African Judge Richard Goldstone, head of the Report of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, also known as the Goldstone Report, writing in The New York Times in October 2011, said that "in Israel, there is no apartheid. Nothing there comes close to the definition of apartheid under the 1998 Rome Statute." Goldstone noted that Arab citizens of Israel are allowed to vote, have political parties, and hold seats in the Knesset and other positions, including one on the Israeli Supreme Court. Goldstone wrote that the situation in the West Bank was more complex, but that there is no attempt to maintain "an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group", and claimed that the seemingly oppressive measures taken by Israel were taken to protect its own citizens from attacks by Palestinian militants. However the Goldstone Report does not contain any reference to charges of apartheid, whether supported or not. With regard to associated issue of positive findings of Israeli war crimes in the report, Goldstone has argued for a redaction. However the other three authors of the Goldstone Report have publicly rejected this arguing Goldstone has "misrepresented facts in an attempt to delegitimise the Report's findings and to cast doubts on its credibility".
South Africa.
The name of the crime comes from a system of racial segregation in South Africa enforced through legislation by the National Party (NP), the governing party from 1948 to 1994. Under apartheid, the rights, associations, and movements of the majority black inhabitants and other ethnic groups were curtailed, and white minority rule was maintained.

</doc>
<doc id="79943" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79943" title="Sporting de Gijón">
Sporting de Gijón

Real Sporting de Gijón, S.A.D. is a Spanish football club from Gijón, Asturias. Founded on 1 June 1905, it plays in La Liga. Known as "Los Rojiblancos" because of their red and white striped jerseys, their home ground is El Molinón stadium, the oldest professional football ground in Spain, in use since at least 1908. Its name is often abbreviated to Real Sporting or just Sporting. Its Asturian name is "Real Sporting de Xixón".
History.
The club was established in 1905 with the name Sporting Gijonés, Anselmo López being the first club president. King Alfonso XIII accepted the Royal patronage of the club for the Spanish Crown in 1912, introducing the term "Real" (Spanish for "Royal") to its name, becoming Real Sporting Club Gijonés. In 1916, a new change took place to adopt today's denomination, Real Sporting de Gijón. From 1941 until the 1970s, due to a temporary law forbidding the use of foreign words in football club names, the team's official denomination was Real Gijón.
In 1944, the club was promoted into La Liga for the first time, and played thereafter in both the first and second divisions, achieving greatest success in the late 1970s and early 1980s. During this period, with players like Quini, Cundi, Enzo Ferrero or Antonio Maceda and others, Sporting competed for the titles, finishing as runner-up of La Liga in the 1978–79 season and two consecutive teams runner-up of the Copa del Rey in 1981 and 1982. This successes allowed Sporting to beat the record of season tickets with 22,766 and allowed El Molinón to be selected as one of the hosts of the 1982 FIFA World Cup. During this time, Sporting competed in the UEFA Cup six times, losing in the Round of 64 four times and the Round of 32 twice, most recently in the 1991–92 season.
Ten seasons later, on 15 June 2008, the club secured promotion back to "Primera" for the 2008–09 season. In that season, their best victories came against Valencia CF (2–3) and Sevilla FC (1–0). In their first five games of the 2008–09 season, they conceded 20 goals. That season also saw them break La Liga record of 29 consecutive games without a draw. They played 33 games before their only draw of the season, a 1–1 finish with Athletic Bilbao on 3 May 2009. On 2 April 2011, they beat Real Madrid 1–0 at Santiago Bernabéu Stadium to end Real manager José Mourinho's nine-year home league unbeaten run. Sporting remained in La Liga until the 2012–13 season, when it finished in the 19th position, being relegated again to the Second Division. In 2015, Sporting once again returned to La Liga after finishing second in the Segunda after a late equaliser conceded by rival Girona in their separate match.
On 30 September 2015, the club announced it sold 22,906 season tickets for the 2015–16 La Liga, surpassing the record of the 1982–83 La Liga.
Club colours and crest.
Sporting de Gijón have worn red and white striped jerseys since their inception, being the first Spanish actual first division's team to wear red and white, as both Athletic Bilbao and Atlético Madrid wore blue and white until 1909. The colors are those of the official flag of Gijón, which itself is based on the flag of the maritime province of Gijón, established in 1845. Traditionally, Sporting wears both blue shorts and socks.
Like most old football clubs, Sporting de Gijón did not initially have any badge displayed on their shirts. Their first official badge was introduced in the 1920s. It consisted of a traditionally shaped shield split into three sections, representing the club and the city.
From 1931 to 1936, during the Spanish Second Republic, the badge consisted of a circular shield and had the royal crown in the top replaced by a mural crown.
The club's badge is a triangle with red and white vertical stripes with 'S' (for Sporting) and 'G' (for Gijón) intertwined, in gold, across them. A crown in the top symbolizes the royal patronage.
Flag.
The official flag of Sporting de Gijón consist of, in a rectangular field with ratio 2:3, nine equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom) alternating with white. The logo of the club is displayed in the centre.
Stadium information.
Mareo facilities.
The Escuela de Fútbol de Mareo is the training ground and academy base of Sporting de Gijón. It was opened on 28 March 1978 and it also has the club headquarters in it.
Located just 7 km away from the city center and covering 112,000 m2, it is used for training and youth teams matches. At present, facilities include inter alia, eight pitches, one service building (including team catering areas), a gymnasium, and a medical centre. The main pitch, where Sporting de Gijón B plays its games, is called "Campo Pepe Ortiz" and has a capacity for 3,000 people.
Mareo is a very prolific "cantera", where several international football players grown being widely famous like Eloy, Ablanedo, Luis Enrique, Abelardo, Manjarín, Juanele or David Villa, World Champion in 2010 with the Spain national team.
Supporters.
During most home matches, the majority of the seats in the stadium are occupied by season ticket holders, or "socios" ("associates"), of which there are 21,000. In addition to "socios", the club has more than 240 "peñas" (official, club-affiliated supporters' groups) in Spain and abroad. During the 2008–09 season, Sporting had the tenth-highest average attendance in the league, 21,491, and the fifth-highest average percentage, 84% of the total stadium capacity.
Sporting de Gijón supporters commonly call themselves "Sportinguistas" in order to show their dedication to the club. "Sportinguistas" are widely regarded as one of the most loyal, traveler, and cheerful supporter groups in La Liga, providing one of the best atmospheres in the competition. When following their team in large groups through the country, they are referred to as "La Mareona", Spanish for "The Big Tide".
About 300,000 fans showed up when Sporting's latest promotion was celebrated in June 2008.
Rivalries.
The team's historic rival is Real Oviedo. When both teams play in the same division, they compete in the Asturian derby.
Sporting de Gijón in European football.
Sporting de Gijón played six editions of the UEFA Cup, but only in two times it passed the first round.

</doc>
<doc id="79945" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79945" title="Albacete Balompié">
Albacete Balompié

Albacete Balompié, S.A.D. is a Spanish football team based in Albacete, in the autonomous community of Castile–La Mancha. Founded on 2 August 1940 it currently plays in Segunda División, holding home matches at "Estadio Carlos Belmonte", with a 17,300-seat capacity.
History.
The club was founded in 1940, under the name "Albacete Fútbol Asociación", being later changed in an attempt to make it sound "more Spanish". After years playing in the lower leagues, Albacete first played in the second division in 1985–86, repeating the feat five seasons later.
In 1989, Benito Floro consecutively promoted it from the third to La Liga, overachieving for a seventh place in the first season in the top level. Floro would later coach Real Madrid, returning to "Alba" two seasons later, as the club were relegated in 1995–96.
After years in the second division facing serious economic and sporting difficulties, Albacete returned to the top flight in the 2002–03 campaign, led by César Ferrando (later of Atlético Madrid). However, it dropped in 2004–05, after just six wins from 38 matches, going on to stabilize in the subsequent seasons in the second level.
The 2010–11 season brought two coaching changes, with both Antonio Calderón and David Vidal (who returned to the club only a few months after leaving) being fired, as Albacete returned to the third division after 21 years. On 6 December 2011, Andrés Iniesta – who played for the club in his youth before joining Barcelona – became the club's major shareholder, donating €420,000 to the cash-strapped club. The team managed to reach the last 16 of the Copa del Rey nonetheless, notably beating Atlético Madrid 3–1 on aggregate.
In March 2013 Agustín Lázaro, CEO of Iniesta's winery enterprise, was appointed as Albacete's chairman. In June the player loaned the club a further €240,000 to cover unpaid wages, thus preventing its administrative relegation to the fourth tier.
Current squad.
"The numbers are established according to the official website: www.albacete-bp.es and www.lfp.es"
Stadium.
The club plays its home matches at the "Estadio Carlos Belmonte", which has an all-seated capacity of 17,200. Originally built in 1960, the stadium underwent two major redevelopments, the last being in 1998.
International players.
"see also "

</doc>
<doc id="79948" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79948" title="Kronia">
Kronia

The Kronia was an Athenian festival held in honor of Cronus (Greek "Kronos") on the 12th day of Hekatombaion, the first month of the Attic calendar and roughly equivalent to the latter part of July and first part of August. The festival was also celebrated in parts of Ionia, and in these places the month was known as Kronion after the festival.
The Roman playwright Accius says that to celebrate the Kronia, "In nearly all fields and towns they happily feast upon banquets, and everyone waits upon his own servants." Slaves and the free, rich and poor, all dined together and played games such as dice "(kyboi)", knucklebones "(astragaloi)", and the board game "pessoi". The freedom from work and social egalitarianism enjoyed on the day represented the conditions of the mythical Golden Age, when Cronus still ruled the world. In the Golden Age, the earth had spontaneously supported human life, and since labor was unneeded, slavery had not existed: "it was a period of thorough harmony in which hierarchical, exploitative, and predatory relationships were nonexistent." Accius describes the Kronia in order to explain its perceived influence on the Roman Saturnalia.
The Kronia was a time for social restraints to be temporarily forgotten. Slaves were released from their duties, and participated in the festivities alongside the slave-owners. Slaves were “permitted to run riot through the city, shouting and making a noise.” It is usually regarded as a celebration of the harvest. Other than the Kronia, there is only limited evidence of religious devotion to Cronus.

</doc>
<doc id="79949" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79949" title="Giovanni Gabrieli">
Giovanni Gabrieli

Giovanni Gabrieli (c. 1554/1557 – 12 August 1612) was an Italian composer and organist. He was one of the most influential musicians of his time, and represents the culmination of the style of the Venetian School, at the time of the shift from Renaissance to Baroque idioms.
Biography.
Gabrieli was born in Venice. He was one of five children, and his father came from the region of Carnia and went to Venice shortly before Giovanni's birth. While not much is known about Giovanni's early life, he probably studied with his uncle, the composer Andrea Gabrieli; he may indeed have been brought up by him, as is implied by the dedication to his 1587 book of concerti, in which he described himself as "little less than a son" to his uncle. He also went to Munich to study with the renowned Orlando de Lassus at the court of Duke Albert V; most likely he stayed there until about 1579. Lassus was to be one of the principal influences on the development of his musical style.
By 1584 he had returned to Venice, where he became principal organist at Saint Mark's Basilica in 1585, after Claudio Merulo left the post; following his uncle's death the following year he took the post of principal composer as well. Also after his uncle's death he began editing much of the older man's music, which would otherwise have been lost; Andrea evidently had had little inclination to publish his own music, but Giovanni's opinion of it was sufficiently high that he devoted much of his own time to compiling and editing it for publication.
Gabrieli's career rose further when he took the additional post of organist at the Scuola Grande di San Rocco, another post he retained for his entire life. San Rocco was the most prestigious and wealthy of all the Venetian confraternities, and second only to San Marco itself in splendor of its musical establishment. Some of the most renowned singers and instrumentalists in Italy performed there and a vivid description of its musical activity survives in the travel memoirs of the English writer Thomas Coryat. Much of his music was written specifically for that location, although he probably composed even more for San Marco.
San Marco had a long tradition of musical excellence and Gabrieli's work there made him one of the most noted composers in Europe. The vogue that began with his influential volume "Sacrae symphoniae" (1597) was such that composers from all over Europe, especially from Germany, came to Venice to study. Evidently he also made his new pupils study the madrigals being written in Italy, so not only did they carry back the grand Venetian polychoral style to their home countries, but also the more intimate style of madrigals; Heinrich Schütz and others helped transport the transitional early Baroque music north to Germany, a trend that decisively affected subsequent music history. The productions of the German Baroque, culminating in the music of J.S. Bach, were founded on this strong tradition, which had its roots in Venice.
Gabrieli was increasingly ill after about 1606, at which time church authorities began to appoint deputies to take over duties he could no longer perform. He died in 1612 in Venice, of complications from a kidney stone.
Music and style.
Though Gabrieli composed in many of the forms current at the time, he preferred sacred vocal and instrumental music. All of his secular vocal music is relatively early; he never wrote lighter forms, such as dances; and late in his career he concentrated on sacred vocal and instrumental music that exploited sonority for maximum effect. Among the innovations credited to him – and while he was not always the first, he was the most famous to do these things – were the use of dynamics; the use of specifically notated instrumentation (as in the famous "Sonata pian' e forte"); and the use of massive forces arrayed in multiple, spatially separated groups, an idea which was to be the genesis of the Baroque concertato style, and which spread quickly to northern Europe, both by the report of visitors to Venice and by Gabrieli's students, which included Hans Leo Hassler and Heinrich Schütz.
Like composers before and after him, he would use the unusual layout of the San Marco church, with its two choir lofts facing each other, to create striking spatial effects. Most of his pieces are written so that a choir or instrumental group will first be heard on one side, followed by a response from the musicians on the other side; often there was a third group situated on a stage near the main altar in the center of the church. While this polychoral style had been extant for decades (Adrian Willaert may have made use of it first, at least in Venice) Gabrieli pioneered the use of carefully specified groups of instruments and singers, with precise directions for instrumentation, and in more than two groups. The acoustics were and are such in the church that instruments, correctly positioned, could be heard with perfect clarity at distant points. Thus instrumentation which looks strange on paper, for instance a single string player set against a large group of brass instruments, can be made to sound, in San Marco, in perfect balance. A fine example of these techniques can be seen in the scoring of In Ecclesiis.
Gabrieli's first motets were published alongside his uncle Andrea's compositions in his 1587 volume of "Concerti". These pieces show much influence of his uncle's style in the use of dialogue and echo effects. There are low and high choirs and the difference between their pitches is marked by the use of instrumental accompaniment. The motets published in Giovanni's 1597 "Sacrae Symphoniae" seem to move away from this technique of close antiphony towards a model in which musical material is not simply echoed, but developed by successive choral entries. Some motets, such as "Omnes Gentes" developed the model almost to its limits. In these motets, instruments are an integral part of the performance, and only the choirs marked "Capella" are to be performed by singers for each part.
There seems to be a distinct change in Gabrieli's style after 1605, the year of publication of Monteverdi's "Quinto libro di madrigali", and Gabrieli's compositions are in a much more homophonic style as a result. There are sections purely for instruments – called "Sinfonia" – and small sections for soloists singing florid lines, accompanied simply by a basso continuo. "Alleluia" refrains provide refrains within the structure, forming rondo patterns in the motets, with close dialogue between choirs and soloists.
In particular, one of his best-known pieces, "In Ecclesiis", is a showcase of such polychoral techniques, making use of four separate groups of instrumental and singing performers, underpinned by the omnipresent organ and continuo.
Works.
A collection of 36 short works by Gabrieli, Girolamo Frescobaldi, and others.

</doc>
<doc id="79953" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79953" title="Jeffrey Eugenides">
Jeffrey Eugenides

Jeffrey Kent Eugenides (born March 8, 1960) is an American novelist and short story writer. He has written numerous short stories and essays, as well as three novels: "The Virgin Suicides" (1993), "Middlesex" (2002), and" The Marriage Plot" (2011). "The Virgin Suicides" has been filmed, while "Middlesex" received the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in addition to being a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award, the International Dublin Literary Award, and France's Prix Médicis.
Biography.
Eugenides was born in Detroit, Michigan, to a father of Greek descent and a mother of English and Irish ancestry. He attended Grosse Pointe's private University Liggett School and took his undergraduate degree at Brown University (where he became friends with contemporary Rick Moody), graduating in 1983 after taking a year off to travel across Europe and to volunteer with Mother Teresa in Calcutta, India. Of his decision to study at Brown, Eugenides later remarked "I chose Brown largely in order to study with John Hawkes, whose work I admired. I entered the honors program in English, which forced me to study the entire English tradition, beginning with "Beowulf". I felt that since I was going to try to add to the tradition, I had better know something about it." He later earned an M.A. in Creative Writing from Stanford University.
Eugenides knew he wanted to be a writer from a relatively early age, stating "I decided very early; during my junior year of high school. We read "A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" that year, and it had a big effect on me, for reasons that seem quite amusing to me now. I'm half Irish and half Greek—my mother's family were Kentuckians, Southern hillbillies, and my paternal grandparents immigrants from Asia Minor—and, for that reason, I identified with Stephen Dedalus. Like me, he was bookish, good at academics, and possessed an “absurd name, an ancient Greek.” [...] I do remember thinking [...] that to be a writer was the best thing a person could be. It seemed to promise maximum alertness to life. It seemed holy to me, and almost religious." Of his earliest literary influences, Eugenides has cited "[...] the great modernists. Joyce, Proust, Faulkner. From these I went on to discover Musil, Woolf, and others, and soon my friends and I were reading Pynchon and John Barth. My generation grew up backward. We were weaned on experimental writing before ever reading much of the nineteenth-century literature the modernists and postmodernists were reacting against."
Eugenides was raised in Detroit, Michigan and cites the influence of the city and his high-school experiences on his writings. He has said that he has "a perverse love" of his birthplace. "I think most of the major elements of American history are exemplified in Detroit, from the triumph of the automobile and the assembly line to the blight of racism, not to mention the music, Motown, the MC5, house, techno." He also says he has been haunted by the decline of Detroit.
In 1986, he received the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Nicholl Fellowship for his story "Here Comes Winston, Full of the Holy Spirit." After living a few years in San Francisco, he moved to Brooklyn, New York and worked as secretary for the Academy of American Poets. While in New York he made friends with numerous similarly struggling writers, including Jonathan Franzen.
From 1999 to 2004, Eugenides lived in Berlin, Germany, where he moved after being awarded a grant from the German Academic Exchange Service to write in Berlin for a year. Eugenides has lived in Princeton, New Jersey, since the fall of 2007, when Eugenides joined the faculty of Princeton University's Program in Creative Writing.
Eugenides is now based, with his wife and child, in Princeton, New Jersey, where he is Professor of Creative Writing in the Peter B. Lewis Center for the Arts. Of teaching creative writing, Eugenides remarked in an interview in "The Paris Review", "I tell my students that when you write, you should pretend you're writing the best letter you ever wrote to the smartest friend you have. That way, you'll never dumb things down. You won't have to explain things that don't need explaining. You'll assume an intimacy and a natural shorthand, which is good because readers are smart and don't wish to be condescended to. I think about the reader. I care about the reader. Not “audience.” Not “readership.” Just the reader."
Career.
"The Virgin Suicides".
Eugenides' 1993 novel, "The Virgin Suicides", has been translated into 34 languages. In 1999, the novel was adapted into a critically acclaimed film directed by Sofia Coppola. Set in Grosse Pointe, Michigan, the novel follows the lives and deaths by suicide of five sisters over the course of an increasingly isolated year, as told from the point of view of the neighborhood boys who obsessively watch them.
1996–2001.
Eugenides also published short stories in the near decade between "The Virgin Suicides" and "Middlesex", primarily in "The New Yorker". His 1996 story "Baster" became the basis for the 2010 romantic comedy "The Switch", temporarily putting "Middlesex" aside in the late 90s to begin work on a novel that would eventually serve as the basis for his third. Two excerpts of what became Eugenides's work-in-progress third novel after "Middlesex" also appeared in "The New Yorker" in 2011, "Asleep in the Lord" and "Extreme Solitude". Eugenides also served as the editor of the collection of short stories titled "My Mistress's Sparrow is Dead". The proceeds of the collection go to the writing center 826 Chicago, established to encourage young people's writing.
"Middlesex".
His 2002 novel, "Middlesex", won the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in addition to being a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award, the International Dublin Literary Award, and France's Prix Médicis. Following the life and self-discovery of Calliope Stephanides, or later, Cal, an intersex person raised a girl, but hormonally a boy, "Middlesex" also broadly deals with the Greek-American immigrant experience in the United States, the rise and fall of Detroit, and explores the experience of an intersex person in the USA.
"The Marriage Plot".
After a nine-year gap, Eugenides published his third novel, "The Marriage Plot", in October 2011. The novel follows three young adults enmeshed in a love triangle, as they graduate from Brown University and establish themselves in the world. Eugenides is currently at work developing a television screenplay of the novel, which was a finalist of the National Book Critics Circle Award for fiction in 2011; a "New York Times" notable book for 2011; and one of the top books of the year according to lists made by "Publisher's Weekly", "Kirkus Reviews", and "The Telegraph".
Eugenides has revealed that his next literary project will be a book of short stories "[...] which will be a very mixed bag of stories, quite different, not all arranged around a certain theme", and that he has an idea for a fourth novel: "I have an idea; I don't know if it's going to work. But it's going to be a larger canvas, many more characters than in ["The Marriage Plot"]. Again, I'm going to respond to a very small directive. It's going to be written, well, I'm not going to say — but I know how it's going to be written and what the structure's going to be, and it's going to be quite different than "The Marriage Plot.""

</doc>
<doc id="79956" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79956" title="Giuseppe Piazzi">
Giuseppe Piazzi

Giuseppe Piazzi (16 July 1746 – 22 July 1826) was an Italian Catholic priest of the Theatine order, mathematician, and astronomer. He was born in Ponte in Valtellina, and died in Naples. He established an observatory at Palermo, now the "Osservatorio Astronomico di Palermo – Giuseppe S. Vaiana". Perhaps his most famous discovery was the first dwarf planet, Ceres.
Early life.
No documented account of Piazzi's scientific education is available in any of the biographies of the astronomer, even in the oldest ones. Piazzi certainly did some studies in Turin, quite likely attending Giovan Battista Beccaria's lessons. In the years 1768-1770 he was resident at the Theatines' Home in S. Andrea della Valle, Rome, while studying Mathematics under Francesco Jacquier.
In July 1770, he took the chair of Mathematics at the University of Malta. 
In December 1773, he moved to Ravenna as "prefetto degli studenti" and lecturer in Philosophy and Mathematics at the Collegio dei Nobili, where he stayed until the beginning of 1779. After a short period spent in Cremona and in Rome, in March 1781 Piazzi moved to Palermo as lecturer in Mathematics at the University of Palermo (at the time known as "Accademia de' Regj Studi").
He kept this position until 19 January 1787, when he became Professor of Astronomy. Almost at the same time, he was granted permission to spend two years in Paris and London, in order to undergo some practical training in astronomy and also to get some instruments to be specially built for the Palermo Observatory, whose foundation he was in charge of.
In the period spent abroad, from 13 March 1787 until the end of 1789, Piazzi became acquainted with the major French and English astronomers of his time and was able to have the famous altazimuthal circle made by Jesse Ramsden, one of the most skilled instrument-makers of the 18th century. 
The circle was the most important instrument of the Palermo Observatory, whose official foundation took place on 1 July 1790.
In 1817, King Ferdinand put Piazzi in charge of the completion of the Capodimonte (Naples) Observatory, naming him General Director of the Naples and Sicily Observatories.
Astronomy career.
Star cataloguing.
He supervised the compilation of the Palermo Catalogue of stars, containing 7,646 star entries with unprecedented precision, including the star names "Garnet Star" from Herschel, and the original Rotanev and Sualocin. The work on this catalogue was started in 1789, enabling Piazzi and collaborators to observe the sky methodically. The catalogue wasn't finished for first edition publication until 1803, and second edition in 1814. 
Spurred by the success discovering Ceres (see below), and in the line of his catalogue program, Piazzi studied the proper motions of stars in order to find parallax measurement candidates. One of them, 61 Cygni, was specially appointed as a good candidate for measuring a parallax, which was later performed by Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel. The star system 61 Cygni is sometimes still called variously "Piazzi's Flying Star" and "Bessel's Star".
The dwarf planet Ceres.
Piazzi discovered Ceres, today known as the largest member of the asteroid belt. On 1 January 1801 Piazzi discovered a "stellar object" that moved against the background of stars. At first he thought it was a fixed star, but once he noticed that it moved, he became convinced it was a planet, or as he called it, "a new star".
In his journal, he wrote: 
In spite of his assumption that it was a planet, he took the conservative route and announced it as a comet. In a letter to astronomer Barnaba Oriani of he made his suspicions known in writing:
He was not able to observe it long enough as it was soon lost in the glare of the Sun. Unable to compute its orbit with existing methods, the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss developed a new method of orbit calculation that allowed astronomers to locate it again. After its orbit was better determined, it was clear that Piazzi's assumption was correct and this object was not a comet but more like a small planet. Coincidentally, it was also almost exactly where the Titius-Bode law predicted a planet would be.
Piazzi named it "Ceres Ferdinandea," after the Roman and Sicilian goddess of grain and King Ferdinand IV of Naples and Sicily. The Ferdinandea part was later dropped for political reasons. Ceres turned out to be the first, and largest, of the asteroids existing within the asteroid belt. Ceres is today called a dwarf planet.
Posthumous honors.
Born in Italy and named in his honour was the astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth, son of the astronomer William Henry Smyth. In 1871, a memorial statue of Piazzi sculpted by Costantino Corti was dedicated in the main plaza of his birthplace, Ponte. In 1923, the 1000th asteroid to be numbered was named 1000 Piazzia in his honor. The lunar crater "Piazzi" was named after him in 1935. More recently, a large albedo feature, probably a crater, imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope on Ceres, has been informally named "Piazzi".

</doc>
<doc id="79965" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79965" title="Streamer">
Streamer

__NOTOC__
Streamer or streamers may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79967" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79967" title="New Jersey Route 59">
New Jersey Route 59

Route 59, at long, is the shortest state highway in New Jersey, United States. The route consists entirely of a short block of Lincoln Avenue from Union County Route 610 (known locally as South Avenue) in Cranford to New Jersey Route 28 (known locally as North Avenue) along the Cranford–Garwood border. The route functions as an underpass under the Raritan Valley Line of New Jersey Transit, under which it crosses about halfway down the block, along the municipal border. Route 59 was originally a proposed alignment of Route 22, which was supposed to head from an intersection with current day New Jersey Route 159 in Morris County at the Pine Brook Bridge before heading through several counties, terminating at an intersection with New Jersey Route 27 in Rahway. Most of the route was not constructed, and a portion in Garwood and Cranford was re-designated Route 59 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering on January 1, 1953.
Route description.
Route 59 begins at a four-way intersection with Union County Route 610 (CR 610; South Avenue) in the community of Cranford. Route 59 heads northwestward, passing a couple of businesses in both directions. The route crosses under the New Jersey Transit-owned Raritan Valley Line at which point the border of Cranford and Garwood runs along the center of the road. The route continues to the northwest, passing businesses before ending at a signalized T-intersection with Route 28 (North Avenue). The pavement ends at the intersection though a state-constructed bridge carrying the intersection over a small creek is angled such that a road could continue northwest. Throughout the entire length of the route, it is four lanes wide (two in each direction). There is no signed speed limit on any portion of the route.
History.
The alignment of Route 59 was designated as part of the proposed State Highway Route 22 in the 1927 renumbering, which was proposed to run from the Pine Brook Bridge over the Passaic River at State Highway Route 6 in Fairfield Township. (This intersection is currently where New Jersey Route 159 currently crosses the bridge.) The route was to continue through parts of Morris, Essex and Union counties, including intersections with State Highway Route 10 at Livingston, U.S. Route 22 (also State Highway Route 29) at Mountainside, State Highway Route 28 at Garwood (where Routes 28 and 59 currently meet), and terminate in the community of Rahway at State Highway Route 27. Most of this route was not constructed, except a portion from State Highway Route 28 (North Avenue) in Cranford to South Avenue in Garwood. This portion was renumbered as Route 59 in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering on January 1, 1953 so as not to duplicate U.S. Route 22.

</doc>
<doc id="79969" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79969" title="Enlightenment (software)">
Enlightenment (software)

Enlightenment, also known simply as E, is a compositing and stacking window manager for the X Window System. Since version 20, Enlightenment is also a Wayland compositor. Enlightenment developers have referred to it as "the original eye-candy window manager".
Enlightenment includes functions to provide a graphical shell, and it can be used in conjunction with programs written for GNOME or KDE. When used together with the Enlightenment Foundation Libraries (EFL), Enlightenment can refer to an entire desktop environment.
History.
The first version of Enlightenment was released by Rasterman (Carsten Haitzler) in 1997.
Version 0.17, also referred to as E17, was in development for 12 years starting in December 2000 until 21 December 2012 when it was officially presented to the world as a stable release. During the development period it was also referred to as DR17 (Development Release 17).
It is a complete rewrite on DR16 and was designed to be a full-fledged desktop shell, based on the new Enlightenment Foundation Libraries (EFL).
E16 itself is still in active development that runs independently of E17, reaching the 1.0 milestone in 2009 (1.0.17 as of 2015).
Bodhi Linux was built around the Enlightenment 17 desktop, but forked it to create the Moksha (desktop).
The current version is E20.
Features.
E16.
One of the aims of the window manager is to be as configurable as possible, and to this end, it includes customization dialogs for focus settings, window movement, resizing, grouping and placement settings, audio, multiple desktop, desktop background, pager, tooltip and autoraise settings. It also includes a special effects dialog, including a desktop 'ripple' effect.
E17.
E17 has many core features such as:

</doc>
<doc id="79977" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79977" title="IceWM">
IceWM

IceWM is a stacking window manager for the X Window System graphical infrastructure, written by Marko Maček. It was written from scratch in C++ and is released under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License. It is relatively lightweight in terms of memory and CPU usage, and comes with themes that allow it to imitate the GUI of Windows 95, Windows XP, Windows 7, OS/2, Motif, and other graphical user interfaces. IceWM is meant to excel in look and feel while being lightweight and customizable.
IceWM can be configured from plain text files stored in a user's home directory, making it easy to customize and copy settings. IceWM has an optional, built-in taskbar with menu, tasks display, network and CPU meters, mail check and configurable clock. Official support for GNOME and KDE menus used to be available as a separate package. In recent IceWM versions, support for them is built-in as well. External graphical programs for editing configuration and menu exist.
Usage.
IceWM is installed as the main Window Manager for a live version of Linux called Lightweight Portable Security, Absolute Linux, and Puppy Linux.
The Easy mode default desktop of the Asus Eee PC uses IceWM.

</doc>
<doc id="79979" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79979" title="Premise (disambiguation)">
Premise (disambiguation)

Premise (from the Latin "praemissa [propositio]", meaning "placed in front") can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79980" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79980" title="Guggenheim Museum">
Guggenheim Museum

Guggenheim Museum may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="79981" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79981" title="Pelvic lipomatosis">
Pelvic lipomatosis

The rare disease pelvic lipomatosis is most often seen in older obese black men with hypertension. In pelvic lipomatosis, abnormally dense deposits of otherwise apparently normal fat may be observed in the spaces of the pelvic area. Associated with cystitis glandularis, a precursor to adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder.

</doc>
<doc id="79982" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79982" title="Shigeru Miyamoto">
Shigeru Miyamoto

Miyamoto originally joined Nintendo in 1977, when the company was beginning its foray into video games, and starting to abandon the playing cards it had made starting in 1889. His games have been seen on every Nintendo video game console, with his earliest work appearing on arcade machines in the late 70s. Franchises Miyamoto has helped create include the "Mario", "Donkey Kong", "The Legend of Zelda", "Star Fox", "F-Zero", "Pikmin", and "Wii" series. Noteworthy games within these include "Super Mario Bros.", one of the most well known video games; "Super Mario 64", and "", one of the most critically acclaimed video games of all time.
As a result of Nintendo president Satoru Iwata's death in July 2015, Miyamoto fulfilled the role of acting Representative Director, alongside Genyo Takeda, until being appointed as the company's "Creative Fellow" in September 2015. He formerly managed the Entertainment Analysis & Development division, which developed many of Nintendo's first-party titles.
Early life.
Miyamoto was born in the Japanese town of Sonobe, a rural town northwest of Kyoto, on November 16, 1952. His parents were of "modest means," and his father taught the English language.
From an early age, Miyamoto began to explore the natural areas around his home. On one of these expeditions, Miyamoto came upon a cave, and, after days of hesitation, went inside. Miyamoto's expeditions into the Kyoto countryside inspired his later work, particularly "The Legend of Zelda", a seminal video game.
Miyamoto graduated from Kanazawa Municipal College of Industrial Arts with a degree in industrial design but no job lined up. He also had a love for manga and initially hoped to become a professional manga artist before considering a career in video games. He was influenced by manga's classical kishōtenketsu narrative structure, as well as Western genre television shows. The title that inspired him to enter the video game industry was the 1978 arcade hit "Space Invaders".
Career.
1977–1984: Arcade beginnings; "Donkey Kong".
Nintendo, a relatively small Japanese company, had traditionally sold playing cards and other novelties, although it had started to branch out into toys and games in the mid 1960s. Through a mutual friend, Miyamoto's father arranged an interview with Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi. After showing some of his toy creations, Miyamoto was hired in 1977 as an apprentice in the planning department.
Miyamoto went on to become the company's first artist. He helped create the art for the company's first original coin-operated arcade video game, "Sheriff". He first helped the company develop a game with the release "Radar Scope". The game achieved moderate success in Japan, but by , Nintendo's efforts to break it into the North American video game market had failed, leaving the company with a large number of unsold units and on the verge of financial collapse. In an effort to keep the company afloat, Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi decided to convert unsold "Radar Scope" units into a new arcade game. He tasked Miyamoto with the conversion, about which Miyamoto has said self-deprecatingly said that "no one else was available" to do the work. Nintendo's head engineer, Gunpei Yokoi, supervised the project.
Miyamoto imagined many characters and plot concepts, but eventually settled on a love triangle between a gorilla, a carpenter, and a girl. He meant to mirror the rivalry between comic characters Bluto and Popeye for the woman Olive Oyl, although Nintendo could not gain the rights to a "Popeye" adaptation. Bluto evolved into an ape, a form Miyamoto claimed was "nothing too evil or repulsive". This ape would be the pet of the main character, "a funny, hang-loose kind of guy." Miyamoto also named "Beauty and the Beast" and the 1933 film "King Kong" as influences. "Donkey Kong" marked the first time that the formulation of a video game's storyline preceded the actual programming, rather than simply being appended as an afterthought. Miyamoto had high hopes for his new project, but lacked the technical skills to program it himself; instead, he conceived the game's concepts, then consulted technicians on whether they were possible. He wanted to make the characters different sizes, move in different manners, and react in various ways. However, Yokoi viewed Miyamoto's original design as too complex. Yokoi suggested using see-saws to catapult the hero across the screen; however, this proved too difficult to program. Miyamoto next thought of using sloped platforms and ladders for travel, with barrels for obstacles. When he asked that the game have multiple stages, the four-man programming team complained that he was essentially asking them to make the game repeat, but the team eventually successfully programmed the game. When the game was sent to Nintendo of America for testing, the sales manager disapproved of its vast differentiation from the maze and shooter games common at the time. When American staffers began naming the characters, they settled on "Pauline" for the woman, after Polly James, wife of Nintendo's Redmond, Washington, warehouse manager, Don James. The playable character, initially "Jumpman", was eventually named for Mario Segale, the warehouse landlord. These character names were printed on the American cabinet art and used in promotional materials. The staff also pushed for an English name, and thus it received the title "Donkey Kong".
"Donkey Kong" was a success, leading Miyamoto to work on sequels "Donkey Kong Jr." and "Donkey Kong 3". His next game was based on the character from "Donkey Kong". He reworked the character Jumpman into Mario, and gave him a brother: Luigi. He named the new game "Mario Bros." Yokoi convinced Miyamoto to give Mario some superhuman abilities, namely the ability to fall from any height unharmed. Mario's appearance in "Donkey Kong"—overalls, a hat, and a thick mustache—led Miyamoto to change aspects of the game to make Mario look like a plumber rather than a carpenter. Miyamoto felt that New York City provided the best setting for the game, with its "labyrinthine subterranean network of sewage pipes". The two-player mode and other aspects of gameplay were partially inspired by an earlier video game entitled "Joust". To date, "Mario Bros." has been released for more than a dozen platforms.
1985–1989: NES/Famicom; "Super Mario Bros." and "The Legend of Zelda".
As Nintendo released its first home video game console, the Family Computer (known in North America as the Nintendo Entertainment System), Miyamoto made two of the most momentous titles for the console and in the history of video games as a whole: "Super Mario Bros." (a sequel to "Mario Bros.") and "The Legend of Zelda" (an entirely original title). In both games, Miyamoto decided to focus more on gameplay than on high scores, unlike many games of the time. "Super Mario Bros." largely took a linear approach, with the player traversing the stage by running, jumping, and dodging or defeating enemies. By contrast, Miyamoto employed nonlinear gameplay in "The Legend of Zelda", forcing the player to think their way through riddles and puzzles. The world was expansive and seemingly endless, offering "an array of choice and depth never seen before in a video game." With "The Legend of Zelda", Miyamoto sought to make an in-game world that players would identify with, a "miniature garden that they can put inside their drawer." He drew his inspiration from his experiences as a boy around Kyoto, where he explored nearby fields, woods, and caves; each "Zelda" title embodies this sense of exploration. "When I was a child," Miyamoto said, "I went hiking and found a lake. It was quite a surprise for me to stumble upon it. When I traveled around the country without a map, trying to find my way, stumbling on amazing things as I went, I realized how it felt to go on an adventure like this." He recreated his memories of becoming lost amid the maze of sliding doors in his family home in "Zelda"s labyrinthine dungeons. In February 1986, Nintendo released the game as the launch title for the Nintendo Entertainment System's new Disk System peripheral.
Miyamoto worked on various different games for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including "Ice Climber", "Kid Icarus", "Excitebike", and "Devil World". He also worked on sequels to both "Super Mario Bros" and "The Legend of Zelda". ', released only in Japan at the time, reuses gameplay elements from "Super Mario Bros.", though the game is much more difficult than its predecessor. Nintendo of America disliked "Super Mario Bros. 2", which they found to be frustratingly difficult and otherwise little more than a modification of "Super Mario Bros." Rather than risk the franchise's popularity, they cancelled its stateside release and looked for an alternative. They realized they already had one option in ' (Dream Factory: Heart-Pounding Panic), also designed by Miyamoto. This game was reworked and released as "Super Mario Bros. 2" (not to be confused with the Japanese game of the same name) in North America and Europe.
The successor to "The Legend of Zelda", "" bears little resemblance to the first game in the series. "The Adventure of Link" features side-scrolling areas within a larger world map rather than the bird's eye view of the previous title. The game incorporates a strategic combat system and more RPG elements, including an experience points (EXP) system, magic spells, and more interaction with non-player characters (NPCs). Link has extra lives; no other game in the series includes this feature. "The Adventure of Link" plays out in a two-mode dynamic. The overworld, the area where the majority of the action occurs in other "The Legend of Zelda" games, is still from a top-down perspective, but it now serves as a hub to the other areas. Whenever Link enters a new area such as a town, the game switches to a side-scrolling view. These separate methods of traveling and entering combat are one of many aspects adapted from the role-playing genre. The game was highly successful at the time, and introduced elements such as Link's "magic meter" and the Dark Link character that would become commonplace in future Zelda games, although the role-playing elements such as experience points and the platform-style side-scrolling and multiple lives were never used again in the official series. The game is also looked upon as one of the most difficult games in the "Zelda" series and 8-bit gaming as a whole. Additionally, "The Adventure of Link" was one of the first games to combine role-playing video game and platforming elements to a considerable degree.
Soon after, "Super Mario Bros. 3" was developed by Nintendo Entertainment Analysis & Development; the game took more than two years to complete. The game offers numerous modifications on the original "Super Mario Bros.", ranging from costumes with different abilities to new enemies. Bowser's children were designed to be unique in appearance and personality; Miyamoto based the characters on seven of his programmers as a tribute to their work on the game. The Koopalings' names were later altered to mimic names of well-known, Western musicians in the English localization. In a first for the "Mario" series, the player navigates via two game screens: an overworld map and a level playfield. The overworld map displays an overhead representation of the current world and has several paths leading from the world's entrance to a castle. Moving the on-screen character to a certain tile will allow access to that level's playfield, a linear stage populated with obstacles and enemies. The majority of the game takes place in these levels.
1990–2000: SNES and N64; "Super Mario 64" and "Ocarina of Time".
A merger between Nintendo's various internal research and development teams led to the creation of Nintendo Entertainment Analysis & Development (Nintendo EAD), which Miyamoto headed. Nintendo EAD had approximately fifteen months to develop "F-Zero", one of the launch titles for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Miyamoto worked through various games on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, one of them "Star Fox". For the game, programmer Jez San convinced Nintendo to develop an upgrade for the Super Nintendo, allowing it to handle three-dimensional graphics better: the Super FX chip. Using this new hardware, Miyamoto and Katsuya Eguchi designed the "Star Fox" game with an early implementation of three-dimensional graphics.
Miyamoto produced two major "Mario" titles for the system. The first, "Super Mario World", was a launch title and was bundled with Super Nintendo Entertainment System consoles. It featured an overworld as in "Super Mario Bros." but introduced a new character, Yoshi, who would go on to appear in various other Nintendo games. The second "Mario" game for the system, "Super Mario RPG", went in a somewhat different direction. Miyamoto led a team consisting of a partnership between Nintendo and Square Co.; it took nearly a year to develop the graphics. The story takes place in a newly rendered Mushroom Kingdom based on the "Super Mario Bros." series.
Miyamoto also created "The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past" for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, the third entry in the series. Dropping the side-scrolling elements of its predecessor, "A Link to the Past" introduced to the series elements that are still commonplace today, such as the concept of an alternate or parallel world, the Master Sword, and other new weapons and items.
Shigeru Miyamoto mentored Satoshi Tajiri, guiding him during the creation process of "Pocket Monsters: Red and Green" (released in English as "Pokémon Red" and "Blue"), the initial video games in the Pokémon series. Pokémon would go on to be one of the most popular entertainment franchises in the world, spanning video games, anime, and various other merchandise.
Miyamoto made several games for the Nintendo 64, mostly from his previous franchises. His first game on the new system, and one of its launch titles, was "Super Mario 64", for which he was the principal director. In developing the game, he began with character design and the camera system. Miyamoto and the other designers were initially unsure of which direction the game should take, and spent months to select an appropriate camera view and layout. The original concept involved a fixed path much like an isometric type game, before the choice was made to settle on a free-roaming 3D design.
Using what he had learned about the Nintendo 64 from developing "Super Mario 64" and "Star Fox 64", Miyamoto produced his next game, ', leading a team of several directors. Its engine was based on that of "Super Mario 64" but was so heavily modified as to be a somewhat different engine. Individual parts of "Ocarina of Time" were handled by multiple directors—a new strategy for Nintendo EAD. However, when things progressed slower than expected, Miyamoto returned to the development team with a more central role assisted in public by interpreter Bill Trinen. The team was new to 3D games, but assistant director Makoto Miyanaga recalls a sense of "passion for creating something new and unprecedented". Miyamoto went on to produce a sequel to "Ocarina of Time", known as '. By re-using the game engine and graphics from "Ocarina of Time", a smaller team required only 18 months to finish "Majora's Mask".
Miyamoto worked on a variety of "Mario" series spin-offs for the Nintendo 64, including "Mario Kart 64" and "Mario Party".
2000–2011: GameCube, Wii, and DS; "Pikmin" and "Metroid Prime".
Miyamoto produced various games for the GameCube, including the launch title "Luigi's Mansion". The game was first revealed at Nintendo Space World 2000 as a technical demo designed to show off the graphical capabilities of the GameCube. Miyamoto made an original short demo of the game concepts, and Nintendo decided to turn it into a full game. "Luigi's Mansion" was later shown at E3 2001 with the GameCube console. Miyamoto continued to make additional "Mario" spinoffs in these years. He also produced the 3D game series "Metroid Prime", after the original designer Yokoi, a friend and mentor of Miyamoto's, died. In this time he developed "Pikmin" and its sequel "Pikmin 2", based on his experiences gardening. He also worked on new games for the "Star Fox", "Donkey Kong", "F-Zero" and "The Legend of Zelda" series on both the GameCube and the Game Boy Advance systems. With the help of Hideo Kojima, he guided the developers of "". He helped with many games on the Nintendo DS, including the remake of "Super Mario 64", "Super Mario 64 DS", and the new game "Nintendogs", a new franchise based on his own experiences with dogs.
Miyamoto played a major role in the development of the Wii, a console that popularized motion control gaming, and its launch title "Wii Sports", which helped show the capability of the new control scheme. Miyamoto went on to produce other titles in the "Wii" series, including "Wii Fit". His inspiration for "Wii Fit" was to encourage conversation and family bonding.
At E3 2004, Miyamoto unveiled ', appearing dressed as the protagonist Link with a sword and shield. Also released for the GameCube, the game was among the Wii's launch titles and the first in the "Zelda" series to implement motion controls. He also helped with ', the newest game in the series, which featured more accurate motion controls. He also produced two "Zelda" titles for the Nintendo DS, ' and '. These were the first titles in the series to implement touch screen controls.
Miyamoto produced three major "Mario" titles for Wii from 2007 to 2010: "Super Mario Galaxy", "New Super Mario Bros. Wii", and "Super Mario Galaxy 2".
2011–present: Wii U and 3DS.
Miyamoto produced both "Super Mario 3D Land" and "" for the 3DS and "Pikmin 3" for the Wii U.
Following the death of Nintendo President Satoru Iwata on July 11, 2015, Miyamoto was appointed as acting Representative Director of Nintendo alongside Genyo Takeda, effective on July 13. He will be relieved of this position on September 16 when Tatsumi Kimishima assumes the role of the company's president. He will also be appointed the position of "Creative Fellow" at that time, providing expert advice to Kimishima as a "support network" alongside Takeda.
Development philosophy.
Miyamoto, and Nintendo as a whole, do not use focus groups. Instead, Miyamoto figures out if a game is fun for himself. He says that if he enjoys it, others will too. He elaborates, citing the conception of the "Pokémon" series as an example, "And that's the point – Not to make something sell, something very popular, but to love something, and make something that we creators can love. It's the very core feeling we should have in making games." Miyamoto wants players to experience "kyokan"; he wants "the players to feel about the game what the developers felt themselves."
He then tests it with friends and family. He encourages younger developers to consider people who are new to gaming, for example by having them switch their dominant hand with their other hand to feel the experience of an unfamiliar game.
Miyamoto's philosophy does not focus on hyper-realistic graphics, although he realizes they have their place. He is more focused on the game mechanics, such as the choices and challenges in the game. Similar to how manga artists subverted their genre, Miyamoto hopes to subvert some of the basic principles he had popularized in his early games, retaining some elements but eliminating others. He prefers to change his games right until they are finalized, and to make "something unique and unprecedented", bearing cinematic qualities. However, he prefers the game to be interactively fun rather than have elaborate film sequences, stating in 1999, "I will never make movie-like games". For these reasons, he opposes prerendered cutscenes. Miyamoto has stated that "Donkey Kong" and "Super Mario Bros." were not intended to be childish games, and that he hopes his works appeal to a wide variety of different people. Part of Miyamoto's development philosophy is to make his games friendly to the player; for example, the ability to save and resume one's progress. He has said that finishing touches on a game can make a large difference on the final product.
Impact.
"Time" called Miyamoto "the Spielberg of video games" and "the father of modern video games," while "The Daily Telegraph" says he is "regarded by many as possibly the most important game designer of all time." "GameTrailers" called him "the most influential game creator in history." Miyamoto has significantly influenced various aspects of the medium. "The Daily Telegraph" credited him with creating "some of the most innovative, ground breaking and successful work in his field." Many of Miyamoto's works have pioneered new video game concepts or refined existing ones. Miyamoto's games have received outstanding critical praise, some being considered the greatest games of all time.
Miyamoto's games have also sold very well, becoming some of the best-selling games on Nintendo consoles and of all time. As of 1999, his games had sold 250 million units and grossed billions of dollars.
Calling him one of the few "video-game auteurs," "The New Yorker" credited Miyamoto's role in creating the franchises that drove console sales, as well as designing the consoles themselves. They described Miyamoto as Nintendo's "guiding spirit, its meal ticket, and its playful public face," noting that Nintendo might not exist without him. "The Daily Telegraph" similarly attributed Nintendo's success to Miyamoto more than any other person.
Influence on video games.
Miyamoto's best known and most influential title, "Super Mario Bros.", "depending on your point of view, created an industry or resuscitated a comatose one." "The Daily Telegraph" called it "a title that set the standard for all future videogames." G4 noted "Super Mario Bros."s revolutionary gameplay as well as its role in "almost single-handedly" rescuing the video game industry. The title also popularized the side-scrolling genre of video games. "The New Yorker" described "Mario" as the first folk hero of video games, with as much influence as Mickey Mouse.
"GameSpot" featured "The Legend of Zelda" as one of the 15 most influential games of all time, for being an early example of open world, nonlinear gameplay, and for its introduction of battery backup saving, laying the foundations for later action-adventure games like "Metroid" and role-playing video games like "Final Fantasy", while influencing most modern games in general. In 2009, "Game Informer" called "The Legend of Zelda" "no less than the greatest game of all time" on their list of "The Top 200 Games of All Time", saying that it was "ahead of its time by years if not decades".
At the time of the release of "Star Fox", the use of filled, three-dimensional polygons in a console game was very unusual, apart from a handful of earlier titles. Due to its success, "Star Fox" has become a Nintendo franchise, with five more games and numerous appearances by its characters in other Nintendo games such as "Super Smash Bros." series.
His game "Super Mario 64" left a lasting impression on 3D game design, particularly notable for its use of a dynamic camera system and the implementation of its analog control. ""s gameplay system introduced features such as a target lock system and context-sensitive buttons that have since become common elements in 3D adventure games.
The Wii, which Miyamoto played a major role in designing, was the first wireless motion-controlled video game console.
Critical reception.
Miyamoto's games have received outstanding critical praise, and are widely considered among the greatest of all time.
Games in Miyamoto's "The Legend of Zelda series" have received outstanding critical acclaim. was a landmark title for Nintendo and is widely considered today to be one of the greatest video games of all time. , is widely considered by critics and gamers alike to be one of the greatest video games ever made. "Twilight Princess" was released to universal critical acclaim, and is the third highest-rated title for the Wii. It received perfect scores from major publications such as CVG, "Electronic Gaming Monthly", "Game Informer", GamesRadar, and GameSpy.
According to Metacritic, "Super Mario Galaxy" and "Super Mario Galaxy 2" are the first- and second-highest rated games for the Wii.
A 1995 article in "Maximum" stated that "in gaming circles Miyamoto's name carries far more weight than Steven Spielberg's could ever sustain."
Commercial reception.
Miyamoto's games have sold very well, becoming some of the best-selling games on Nintendo consoles and of all time.
Miyamoto's "Mario" series is, by far, the best-selling video game franchise of all time, selling over 400 million units. "Super Mario Bros." is the second best-selling video game of all time. "Super Mario Bros.", "Super Mario Bros. 3", and "Super Mario Bros. 2" were, respectively, the three best-selling games for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Levi Buchanan of IGN considered "Super Mario Bros. 3"s appearance in the film "The Wizard" as a show-stealing element, and referred to the movie as a "90-minute commercial" for the game. "Super Mario World" was the best-selling game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. "Super Mario 64" was the best-selling Nintendo 64 game, and as of May 21, 2003, the game had sold eleven million copies. At the end of 2007, "Guinness World Records" reported sales of 11.8 million copies. As of September 25, 2007, it was the seventh best-selling video game in the United States with six million copies sold. By June 2007, "Super Mario 64" had become the second most popular title on Wii's Virtual Console, behind "Super Mario Bros." "Super Mario Sunshine" was the third best-selling video game for the Nintendo GameCube.
The original game in "The Legend of Zelda" series was the fifth best-selling game for the Nintendo Entertainment System. "The Wind Waker" was the fourth best-selling game for the Nintendo GameCube. "Twilight Princess" experienced commercial success. In the PAL region, which covers most of Asia, Africa, South America, Australia, New Zealand, and most of Western Europe, "Twilight Princess" is the best-selling "Zelda" game ever. During its first week, the game was sold with three out of every four Wii purchases. The game had sold 4.52 million copies on the Wii as of March 1, 2008, and 1.32 million on the GameCube as of March 31, 2007.
The "Mario Kart" series has sold well. "Super Mario Kart" is the third best-selling video game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. "Mario Kart 64" is the second best-selling Nintendo 64 game. "" is the second best selling game for the GameCube.
Miyamoto produced "Wii Sports", another of the best-selling games of all time and part of the Wii series.
Awards and recognition.
The name of the main character of the PC game "Daikatana", Hiro Miyamoto, is a homage to Miyamoto. The character Gary Oak from the Pokémon anime series is named Shigeru in Japan and is the rival of Ash Ketchum (called Satoshi in Japan). Pokémon creator Satoshi Tajiri was mentored by Miyamoto.
In 1998, Miyamoto was honored as the first person inducted into the Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences' Hall of Fame. In 2006, Miyamoto was made a "Chevalier" (knight) of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Minister of Culture Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres.
On November 28, 2006, Miyamoto was featured in "TIME Asia"'s "60 Years of Asian Heroes". He was later chosen as one of Time Magazine's 100 Most Influential People of the Year in both 2007 and also in 2008, in which he topped the list with a total vote of 1,766,424. At the Game Developers Choice Awards, on March 7, 2007, Miyamoto received the Lifetime Achievement Award "for a career that spans the creation of Donkey Kong, Super Mario Bros. and The Legend of Zelda to the company's recent revolutionary systems, Nintendo DS and Wii." GameTrailers and IGN placed Miyamoto first on their lists for the "Top Ten Game Creators" and the "Top 100 Game Creators of All Time" respectively.
In a survey of game developers by industry publication "Develop", 30% of the developers, by far the largest portion, chose Miyamoto as their "Ultimate Development Hero". Miyamoto has been interviewed by companies and organizations such as CNN's Talk Asia. He was made a Fellow of BAFTA at the British Academy Video Games Awards on March 19, 2010. In 2012, Miyamoto was also the first interactive creator to be awarded the highest recognition in Spain, the Prince of Asturias Award, in the category of Communications and Humanities.
Personal life.
Miyamoto has a wife, Yasuko, and two children. His son was 25 in 2010 and worked at an advertising agency. His daughter was 23 in 2010 and was studying zoology at the time. His children played video games, but he also made them go outside. Although he knows some English, he does not speak it well, and he prefers to speak in Japanese for interviews.
Miyamoto does not generally sign autographs, out of concern that he would be inundated. He also does not appear on Japanese television, so as to remain anonymous. More foreign tourists than Japanese people approach him.
Although a game designer, Miyamoto spends little time playing video games, preferring to play the guitar, mandolin and banjo. He avidly enjoys bluegrass. He has a Shetland Sheepdog named Pikku that provided the inspiration for "Nintendogs". He is also a semi-professional dog breeder. He has been quoted as stating, "Video games are bad for you? That's what they said about rock and roll."
Miyamoto enjoys rearranging furniture in his house, even late at night. He also stated that he has a hobby of guessing the measurements of objects, then checking to see if he was correct, and apparently carries a tape measure with him everywhere.

</doc>
<doc id="79984" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79984" title="Courtesy titles in the United Kingdom">
Courtesy titles in the United Kingdom

A courtesy title is a form of address in systems of nobility used for children, former wives and other close relatives of a peer, and by certain officials such as some judges. These styles are used 'by courtesy' in the sense that the relatives or officials do not themselves hold substantive titles. There are several different kinds of courtesy titles in the British peerage.
Children of peers.
Courtesy peers.
If a peer of one of the top three ranks (a duke, marquess or earl) has more than one title, his eldest son, not himself an actual peer, may use one of his father's lesser titles 'by courtesy'. However, the father continues to be the substantive holder of the peerage title and the son using the peerage by courtesy legally remains a commoner unless issued a writ of acceleration. If the eldest son of a duke or marquess has an eldest son, he may use a still lower title if one exists.
For example, the Duke of Norfolk is also Earl of Arundel and Baron Maltravers. His eldest son is therefore styled "Earl of Arundel" (without the "The" which indicates a substantive title). Lord Arundel's eldest son (should he have one during his father's lifetime) would be styled "Lord Maltravers". However, only The Duke of Norfolk is actually a peer; his son Lord Arundel and his hypothetical grandson Lord Maltravers remain commoners.
Courtesy peerages are only used by the peer's eldest living son, and the eldest son's eldest living son, and so forth. Other descendants are not permitted to use the peer's subsidiary titles. Only the heir apparent (and heir apparent to the heir apparent and so on) may use the titles. An heir presumptive (e.g. a brother, nephew, or cousin) does not use a courtesy title. However, Scottish practice allows the style "Master/Mistress of X" to an heir presumptive as well as to an heir apparent; for example, the brother of the present Marquess of Tweeddale has the title "Master of Tweeddale".
The wives of courtesy peers are also entitled to courtesy titles, which are the female equivalents of their husbands' courtesy titles. Thus, the wife of an Earl of Arundel would be styled "Countess of Arundel" (without "The").
Holders of courtesy peerages do not, at the Court of St James's, have their title preceded by the definite article "The" (which is always written with the capital letter "T"): e.g., 'Earl of Arundel' rather than 'The Earl of Arundel'.
Choosing a courtesy peer's title.
The actual courtesy title which is used is a matter of family tradition. For instance, the eldest son of The Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry is styled "Earl of Dalkeith", even though the duke is also the Marquess of Dumfriesshire, a title which outranks the earldom. Similarly, the eldest son of The Marquess of Londonderry is styled "Viscount Castlereagh", even though the marquess is also the Earl Vane.
Titles with the same name as a peer's main title are also not used as courtesy titles. For instance, The Duke of Westminster is also The Marquess of Westminster and The Earl Grosvenor (amongst other titles). The duke's eldest son is not styled "Marquess of Westminster" (which would cause confusion between the son and the father), and so is styled "Earl Grosvenor" instead. The title used does not have to be exactly equivalent to the actual peerage: the eldest son of the current Duke of Wellington is styled Marquess "of" Douro, although the actual peerage possessed by his father is Marquess Douro (not "of" Douro).
If a peer of the rank of earl or above does not have any subsidiary titles of a name different from his main title, his eldest son usually uses an invented courtesy title of "Lord ". For instance, the eldest son of The Earl of Devon is styled "Lord Courtenay", even though the Earl has no barony of that name, and similarly the eldest son of The Earl of Guilford is styled "Lord North". The eldest son of The Earl of Huntingdon, who has no subsidiary titles, is styled "Viscount Hastings" to avoid confusion with the substantive peer The Lord Hastings. The Earl Castle Stewart's heir uses the style "Viscount Stewart" in order to avoid confusion with Lord Stewart, the eldest son of Viscount Castlereagh (the eldest son of The Marquess of Londonderry).
Courtesy prefix of "Lord".
Another form of courtesy title is the honorific prefix of "Lord" before the name, and with the definite article 'The' (written with the capital letter 'T' even when the title appears in the middle of a sentence) before the prefix. This non-peerage title is accorded to younger sons of dukes and marquesses. The courtesy title is added before the person's given name and surname, as in the example of The Lord Randolph Churchill, although conversational usage drops the surname on secondary reference. The title persists after the death of the holder's father, but is not inherited by any of his children. The wife of the holder is entitled to the feminine form of her husband's title, which takes the form of "Lady", followed by her husband's given and surname, as in the example of The Lady Randolph Churchill. The holder is addressed as "Lord Randolph" and his wife as "Lady Randolph".
Courtesy prefix of "Lady".
The honorific prefix of "Lady" is used for the daughters of dukes, marquesses and earls, with the definite article 'The' (written with the capital letter 'T' even when the title appears in the middle of a sentence) before the prefix. The courtesy title is added before the person's given name, as in the example The Lady Diana Spencer. The title persists after the death of the holder's father but it is not inherited by her children. The husband of the holder does not bear any courtesy title in right of his wife. The holder is addressed and, on secondary reference, referred to as "Lady Diana".
Courtesy prefix of "The Honourable".
The younger sons of earls, along with all sons and daughters of viscounts, barons and lords of parliament are accorded the courtesy style of "The Honourable" before their given name and surname. This is usually abbreviated to "The Hon." The title persists after the death of the holder's father, but it may not be inherited by the holder's children. It is used only in third person reference, not in speaking to the person.
Married daughters.
The daughter of a duke, marquess, or earl who marries a commoner becomes "Lady ["Given name"] ["Husband's surname"]". The daughter of a viscount or baron who marries a commoner is styled "The Honourable ["Given name"] ["Husband's surname"]" (the given name is dropped and "Mrs" is substituted if the husband's right to the style derives from office or appointment rather than from ancestral peerage).
Any woman who marries a peer uses the feminine version of his peerage title, even if her own precedence is higher than his, as in the case of a duke's daughter marrying a baron, because a peerage is a substantive title, the usage of which is preferred to any courtesy style, unless she marries into the Royal Family. If a woman marries the younger son of a duke or marquess, she becomes "The Lady ["Husband's given name"] ["Husband's surname"]." If she marries the younger son of an earl, viscount or baron, she becomes "The Hon. Mrs ["Husband's given name"] ["Husband's surname"]."
In case of a divorce, she may keep the same style as during marriage or she may choose to assume the style "Mrs ["Given name"] ["Husband's surname"]." Regardless of what she chooses, she loses all precedence acquired from marriage and because of the former option, there can be multiple "Lady John Smiths".
Adopted children.
Until 2004 adopted children of peers had no right to any courtesy title. Pursuant to a Royal Warrant dated 30 April 2004, adopted children are now automatically entitled to the same styles and courtesy titles as their siblings. However, unlike biological children, they cannot inherit peerages from an adopting parent (and so, as they cannot be heirs apparent, adopted sons may only use the styles of younger sons). Note that Scottish peerages' rules for courtesy titles and styles differ.
Indirect inheritance.
Occasionally a peer succeeds to a peerage upon the death of a relative who is not one of his or her parents. When this happens, the relatives of the new peer may be allowed to use the courtesy titles or styles which would have been accorded them if the new peer had succeeded a parent or grandparent in the title.
For instance, Rupert Ponsonby, 7th Baron de Mauley, succeeded his uncle in 2002. His brother Ashley had no title, as their father was only the younger son of a peer and was never actually Baron de Mauley. However, in 2003, Ashley was granted, by Warrant of Precedence from Queen Elizabeth II, the style and precedence that would have been his had his father survived to inherit the barony, becoming "The Honourable Ashley Ponsonby". Precedence in such circumstances is usually granted but is not automatic.
Wives of peers.
The wives of eldest sons of peers hold their titles on the same basis as their husbands, i.e. by courtesy. Thus the wife of The Marquess of Douro is known as "The Marchioness of Douro".
In contrast, the wife of a substantive peer is legally entitled to the privileges of peerage: she is said to have a "life estate" in her husband's dignity. Thus a duke's wife is titled a "duchess", a marquess's wife a "marchioness", an earl's wife a "countess", a viscount's wife a "viscountess" and a baron's wife a "baroness". Despite being referred to as a "peeress", she is not a peer in her own right: this is a 'style' and not a substantive title. However, this is considered a legal title, unlike the social titles of a peer's children.
It is also possible for a woman to be a substantive peer in her own right, by succession or by first creation (i.e. ennoblement, most commonly in recent times under the Life Peerages Act 1958). Her children use courtesy titles according to her rank, as with the children of male peers, but her husband acquires no distinction in right of his wife. Thus, the husband of The Baroness Bottomley of Nettlestone is simply called "Mr Peter Bottomley" and has no courtesy title.
Divorced wives.
A peeress retains her legal right to the peerage style following divorce and even upon her remarriage to a non-peer. A convention has developed whereby her Christian name is added in front of her title to distinguish her from any subsequent wife of her former husband. Hence, "Her Grace The Duchess of London" becomes "Mary, Duchess of London". In written forms, she is not entitled to the use of the address "Her Grace..." but may be addressed as "Duchess". "The Rt Hon. The Lady London" becomes "Mary, Lady London" and may be addressed as "Lady London," or "My Lady".
On 21 August 1996 letters patent changed titles of divorced wives of British princes, depriving their former wives of the style of Royal Highness. For this reason "Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales" after divorce became Diana, Princess of Wales. The same happened to "Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York" who became Sarah, Duchess of York.
Widows.
If a prince or peer dies, his wife's style does not change unless the new peer is a married man (or a woman, if the succession permits); traditionally the widowed peeress puts "Dowager" in her style, i.e. "The Most Hon. The Marchioness of London" becomes "The Most Hon. The Dowager Marchioness of London."
If a widowed peeress's son predeceases her, her daughter-in-law does not use the title of Dowager, but is styled, e.g. "The Most Hon. Mary, Marchioness of London", until her mother-in-law dies, at which point she may use the title of "Dowager Marchioness". In more recent times, some widows choose to be styled with their Christian names, instead of as Dowager, e.g. "Olave, Lady Baden-Powell" ("The Lady Olave Baden-Powell" would incorrectly imply she was the daughter of a duke, marquess or earl).
Divorced wives and widows who remarry.
It used to be customary for women with higher titles from one marriage to retain them even on subsequent remarriage. As Lord Macnaughten put it in the case of "Earl Cowley v Countess Cowley" AC 450: ""...everybody knows that it is a very common practice for peeresses (not being peeresses in their own right) after marrying commoners to retain the title lost by such marriage. It is not a matter of right. It is merely a matter of courtesy, and allowed by the usages of society."" The divorce court, in the above case, granted the earl an injunction preventing his former wife from using his title; however this was overturned by the Court of Appeal, whose decision was confirmed by the House of Lords, on the grounds that ordinary courts of law lacked any jurisdiction in matters of honour.
The same practice was followed by widows who remarried. A prominent example was Catherine Parr, the last wife of Henry VIII, who continued to be known as Queen Catherine even after her marriage to The Lord Seymour of Sudeley (and, indeed, she disputed precedence with the wife of her brother-in-law the Duke of Somerset on this basis).
This usage died out later in the twentieth century, and women who remarry now ordinarily take a new married name and do not retain their former title.
Children of gentry.
Courtesy suffix of "Younger".
A form of courtesy title granted is the suffix of "Younger" at the end of the name. This title is granted to the Heir Apparent of a Laird (Lord) and is placed at the end of his or her name (example - Mr John Smith of Edinburgh, Younger). The wife of a Younger may herself place the title at the end of her name. The holder is addressed as the younger (example - The Younger of Edinburgh).
Courtesy prefix of "Maid".
The courtesy prefix of "Maid" is granted to the eldest daughter of a Laird (Lord). If the eldest daughter is also the heir presumptive she may either hold the title "Younger" or the title "Maid". The title is customary and not automatically given. The title is placed at the end of the name (example - Miss Ali Joy, Maid of Newcastle). The holder is addressed as "The Maid of ["Lairdship"]".
Civil partners.
If a peer or knight enters into a civil partnership, his or her partner is not entitled to a courtesy title. In 2013, there was a private member's bill in the House of Lords to allow the spouse of a woman who holds an honour, if he or she enters civil partnership or marriage, to assume the title "The Honourable". This bill stalled, and was not passed by the end of the Parliament.
Precedence status of courtesy titles.
The courtesy titles and styles of children of peers are social, not legal. For this reason, in official documents, The Lord John Smith is often referred to as "John Smith, Esq., commonly called Lord John Smith"; The Hon. Mrs. Smith would be called "Mary Jane, Mrs. Smith, commonly called The Hon. Mary Jane Smith". Only peers in attendance at Parliament enjoy statutory precedence. There is, however, official precedence accorded at the Court of St. James's that results from being the wife or child of a peer, and to which social styles are attached. The wives of peers, however, are peeresses and legally enjoy their titles in exactly the same manner as peeresses in their own right.
Children of peers can outrank certain actual peers. For instance, the daughter of a duke outranks a countess. However, if the daughter of a duke marries an earl, she drops to the rank of countess, because her courtesy title is subsumed in his substantive title. But, if that same daughter marries a commoner, she retains her rank. If that daughter marries the eldest son of an earl, though he may be a courtesy peer, she may keep her rank until the son inherits the earldom, when she must drop to the rank of countess.
Judicial courtesy titles.
Following the creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, the first Justices of that Court held life peerages, and continued to hold them. However, the Government has announced that future appointees will not be created peers, and the first non-peer appointed to the Court was Sir John Dyson. In order to avoid any distinction between the Justices of the Court, by Royal Warrant all Justices of the Supreme Court not holding a peerage are styled as if they were life peers, and retain the style (a courtesy title) for life. Thus, Sir John Dyson is now styled as "Lord Dyson" (instead of "The Lord Dyson"). Wives of male justices not holding a peerage are styled as if they were wives of peers.
In Scotland, Senators of the College of Justice (judges who sit in the Court of Session) use the title Lord or Lady along with a surname or a territorial name. All Senators of the College have the honorific, The Honourable, before their titles, while those who are also Privy Counsellors or peers have the honorific, The Right Honourable. Senators are made Privy Counsellors upon promotion to the Inner House. For example, Alastair Campbell is known as "The Honourable Lord Bracadale", whilst Ronald Mackay is known as "The Right Honourable Lord Eassie". Some Senators also hold peerage titles, such as The Lady Clark of Calton, and these would be used in place of judicial titles.

</doc>
<doc id="79987" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79987" title="Northern Canada">
Northern Canada

Northern Canada, colloquially the North, is the vast northernmost region of Canada variously defined by geography and politics. Politically, the term refers to three territories of Canada: Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut. Similarly, "the Far North" (when contrasted to "the North") may refer to the Canadian Arctic: the portion of Canada north of the Arctic Circle and lies east of Alaska and west of Greenland. For some purposes, Northern Canada may also include Northern Quebec and Northern Labrador.
These reckonings somewhat depend on the concept of nordicity, a measure of northernness that other Arctic territories share. Canada, a country in northern North America whose population is concentrated along its southern frontier with the United States, is frequently reckoned to not have a "south". As such, the "south" is perceived as a region only when it is contrasted against or viewed from the north.
Sub-divisions.
As a social rather than political region, the Canadian north is often subdivided into two distinct regions based on climate, the "near north" and the "far north". The different climates of these two regions result in vastly different vegetation, and therefore very different economies, settlement patterns, and histories.
The "near north" or subarctic is mostly synonymous with the Canadian boreal forest, a large area of evergreen-dominated forests with a subarctic climate. This area has traditionally been home to the Indigenous peoples of the Subarctic, that is the First Nations, who were hunters of moose, freshwater fishers and trappers. This region was heavily involved in the North American fur trade during its peak importance, and is home to many Métis people who originated in that trade. The area was mostly part of Rupert's Land or the North-Western Territory under the nominal control of the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) from 1670–1869. The HBC's claim was purchased by the Canadian government in 1869, and shortly thereafter the government made a series of treaties with the local First Nations regarding land title. This opened the region to non-Native settlement, as well as to forestry, mining, and oil and gas drilling. Today several million people live in the near north, around 15% of the Canadian total. Large parts of the near north are not part of Canada's territories, but rather are the northern parts of the provinces, meaning they have very different political histories as minority regions within larger units.
The "far north" is synonymous with the areas north of the tree line: the Barren Grounds and tundra. This area is home to the various sub-groups of the Inuit, a people unrelated to other Aboriginal peoples in Canada. These are people who have traditionally relied mostly on hunting marine mammals and caribou, mainly barren-ground caribou, as well as fish and migratory birds. This area was somewhat involved in the fur trade, but was more influenced by the whaling industry. This area was not part of the early 20th century treaty process and aboriginal title to the land has been acknowledged by the Canadian government with the creation of autonomous territories instead of the Indian reserves of further south. Very few non-Aboriginal people have settled in these areas, and the residents of the far north represent less than 1% of Canada's total population. The far north is also often broken into west and eastern halves. The eastern Arctic which means the self-governing territory of Nunavut (much of which is in the true Arctic, being north of the Arctic Circle), as well as Nunavik, an autonomous part of the province of Quebec, and Nunatsiavut an autonomous part of the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, and perhaps a few parts of the Hudson Bay coast of Ontario and Manitoba. The western Arctic is the northernmost portion of the Northwest Territories (roughly Inuvik Region) and a small part of Yukon, together called the Inuvialuit Settlement Region.
Territoriality.
Since 1925, Canada has claimed the portion of the Arctic between 60°W and 141°W longitude, extending all the way north to the North Pole: all islands in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and Herschel, off the Yukon coast, form part of the region, are Canadian territory and the territorial waters claimed by Canada surround these islands. Views of territorial claims in this region are complicated by disagreements on legal principles. Canada and the Soviet Union/Russia have long claimed that their territory extends according to the sector principle to the North Pole. The United States does not accept the sector principle and does not make a sector claim based on its Alaskan Arctic coast. Claims that undersea geographic features are extensions of a country's continental shelf are also used to support claims; for example the Denmark/Greenland claim on territory to the North Pole, some of which is disputed by Canada. Foreign ships, both civilian and military are allowed the right of innocent passage through the territorial waters of a littoral state subject to conditions in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The right of innocent passage is not allowed, however, in internal waters, which are enclosed bodies of water or waters landward of a chain of islands. Disagreements about the sector principle or extension of territory to the North Pole and about the definition of internal waters in the Arctic lie behind differences in territorial claims in the Arctic. This claim is recognized by most countries with some exceptions, including the United States; Denmark, Russia, and Norway have made claims similar to those of Canada in the Arctic and are opposed by the European Union and the U.S.
This is especially important with the Northwest Passage. Canada asserts control of this passage as part of the Canadian Internal Waters because it is within of Canadian islands; the U.S. claims that it is in international waters. Today ice and freezing temperatures make this a minor issue, but climate change may make the passage more accessible to shipping, something that concerns the Canadian government and inhabitants of the environmentally sensitive region.
Similarly, the disputed Hans Island (with Denmark), in the Nares Strait, which is west of Greenland, may be an indication of challenges to overall Canadian sovereignty in the North.
Topography (geography).
While the largest part of the Arctic is composed of permanent ice and tundra north of the tree line, it encompasses geological regions of varying types: the Innuitian Mountains, associated with the Arctic Cordillera mountain system, are geologically distinct from the Arctic Region (which consists largely of lowlands). The Arctic and Hudson Bay Lowlands comprise a substantial part of the geographic region often considered part of the Canadian Shield (in contrast to the sole geological area). The ground in the Arctic is mostly composed of permafrost, making construction difficult and often hazardous, and agriculture virtually impossible.
The Arctic watershed (or drainage basin) drains northern parts of Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia, most of the Northwest Territories and Nunavut as well as parts of Yukon into the Arctic Ocean, including the Beaufort Sea and Baffin Bay. With the exception of the Mackenzie River, Canada's longest river, this watershed has been little used for hydroelectricity. The Peace and Athabasca Rivers along with Great Bear and Great Slave Lake (respectively the largest and second largest lakes wholly enclosed within Canada), are significant elements of the Arctic watershed. Each of these elements eventually merges with the Mackenzie so that it thereby drains the vast majority of the Arctic watershed.
Climate.
Overview.
Under the Köppen climate classification, much of Northern Canada has a subarctic climate, a tundra climate in most of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and an Ice cap climate in Arctic Cordillera. For more than half of the year, much of Northern Canada is snow and ice-covered, with some limited moderation by the relatively warmer waters in coastal areas with temperatures generally remaining below the freezing mark from October to May. During the coldest 3 months, mean monthly temperatures range from in the southern sections to in the northern sections although temperatures can go down to . Owing to the dry cold air prevalent throughout most of the region, snowfall is often light in nature. During the short summers, much of Northern Canada is snow free, except for the Arctic Cordillera which remains covered with snow and ice throughout the year. In the summer months, temperatures average below and may occasionally exceed . Most of the rainfall accumulated occurs in the summer months, ranging from in the northernmost islands to at the southern end of Baffin Island.
Demography.
Using the political definition of the three northern territories, the North, with an area of , makes up 39.3% of Canada.
Although vast, the entire region is very sparsely populated. As of 2011, only about 107,265 people lived there compared to 33,369,423 in the rest of Canada.
The population density for Northern Canada is ( for Yukon, for the NWT and for Nunavut) compared to for Canada.
It is heavily endowed with natural resources and in most cases they are very expensive to extract and situated in fragile environmental areas. Though GDP per person is higher than elsewhere in Canada, the region remains relatively poor, mostly because of the extremely high cost of most consumer goods, and the region is heavily subsidised by the government of Canada.
As of 2006, 52.8% of the population of the three territories (25.1% in Yukon, 50.3% in the NWT and 85.0% in Nunavut) is Aboriginal, Inuit, First Nations or Métis. The Inuit are the largest group of Aboriginal peoples in Northern Canada, and 61.5% of all Canada's Inuit live in Northern Canada, with Nunavut accounting for 52.8%. The region also contains several groups of First Nations, who are mainly Chipewyan peoples. The three territories each have a greater proportion of Aboriginal inhabitants than any of Canada's provinces. There are also many more recent immigrants from around the world; of the territories, Yukon has the largest percentage of non-Aboriginal inhabitants, while Nunavut the smallest.
The largest settlement in Northern Canada is the capital of Yukon, Whitehorse with 23,276 at the 2011 census. Second is Yellowknife, the capital of the Northwest Territories, which contains 19,234 inhabitants. Third is Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut, with 6,699.
Recent.
For hundreds of years, this area had been considered the largest 'uncivilized' area in the world. However, within the last 20 years, specifically in the last 5 years, this area has started to boom with the rest of Canada. Although it has not been on the same scale, some towns and cities have seen population increases not seen for several decades before. Yellowknife has become the centre of diamond production for Canada (which has become one of the top three countries for diamonds).
In the Canada 2006 Census, the three territories posted a combined population of over 100,000 people for the first time in Canadian history.

</doc>
<doc id="79988" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79988" title="Knidos">
Knidos

Knidos or Cnidus (; ) is an ancient settlement located in south-western Asia Minor, modern-day Turkey. It was an ancient Greek city of Caria, part of the Dorian Hexapolis. It was situated on the Datça peninsula, which forms the southern side of the Sinus Ceramicus, now known as Gulf of Gökova. By the 4th century BC, Knidos was located at the site of modern Tekir, opposite Triopion Island. But earlier, it was probably at the site of modern Datça (at the half-way point of the peninsula).
It was built partly on the mainland and partly on the Island of Triopion or Cape Krio. The debate about it being an island or cape is caused by the fact that in ancient times it was connected to the mainland by a causeway and bridge. Today the connection is formed by a narrow sandy isthmus. By means of the causeway the channel between island and mainland was formed into two harbours, of which the larger, or southern, was further enclosed by two strongly built moles that are still in good part entire.
The extreme length of the city was little less than a mile, and the whole intramural area is still thickly strewn with architectural remains. The walls, both of the island and on the mainland, can be traced throughout their whole circuit; and in many places, especially round the acropolis, at the northeast corner of the city, they are remarkably perfect.
History.
Knidos was a city of high antiquity and as a Hellenic city. According to Herodotus' "Histories)" (I.174), the Cnidians were Lacedaemonian colonists; however, the presence of demiurges there argues for foundation or later influence by other Doric Greeks, possibly Argives. Diodorus Siculus (Bibliotheca Historica 5.53) claimed that Cnidus was founded by both Lacedaemonians and Argives. Along with Halicarnassus (present day Bodrum, Turkey) and Kos, and the Rhodian cities of Lindos, Kamiros and Ialyssos it formed the Dorian Hexapolis, which held its confederate assemblies on the Triopian headland, and there celebrated games in honour of Apollo, Poseidon and the nymphs.
The city was at first governed by an oligarchic senate, composed of sixty members, and presided over by a magistrate; but, though it is proved by inscriptions that the old names continued to a very late period, the constitution underwent a popular transformation. The situation of the city was favourable for commerce, and the Knidians acquired considerable wealth, and were able to colonize the island of Lipara, and founded a city on Corcyra Nigra in the Adriatic. They ultimately submitted to Cyrus, and from the battle of Eurymedon to the latter part of the Peloponnesian War they were subject to Athens. During the hellenistic age, Knidos boasted a medical school; however, the theory that this school already existed at the beginning of the classical age is an unwarranted extrapolation.
In their expansion into the region, the Romans easily obtained the allegiance of Knidians, and rewarded them for help given against Antiochus III the Great by leaving them the freedom of their city.
During the Byzantine period there must still have been a considerable population: for the ruins contain a large number of buildings belonging to the Byzantine style, and Christian sepulchres are common in the neighbourhood.
Eudoxus, the astronomer, Ctesias, the writer on Persian history, and Sostratus, the builder of the celebrated Pharos at Alexandria, are the most remarkable of the Knidians mentioned in history.
Bishop Ioannes of Cnidus took part in the Council of Chalcedon in 451 and was one of the signatories of the letter that in 458 the bishops of the Roman province of Caria, to which Cnidus belonged, wrote to Byzantine Emperor Leo I the Thracian after the murder of Proterius of Alexandria. Bishop Evander was at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553 and Bishop Stauratius at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787. No longer a residential bishopric, Cnidus is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.
Excavation history.
The first Western knowledge of the site was due to the mission of the Dilettante Society in 1812, and the excavations executed by C. T. Newton in 1857–1858.
The agora, the theatre, an odeum, a temple of Dionysus, a temple of the Muses, a temple of Aphrodite and a great number of minor buildings have been identified, and the general plan of the city has been very clearly made out. The most famous statue by Praxiteles, the Aphrodite of Knidos, was made for Cnidus. It has perished, but late copies exist, of which the most faithful is in the Vatican Museums. In a temple enclosure Newton discovered the fine seated statue of Demeter of Knidos, which he sent back to the British Museum, and about three miles south-east of the city he came upon the ruins of a splendid tomb, and a colossal figure of a lion carved out of one block of Pentelic marble, ten feet in length and six in height, which has been supposed to commemorate the great naval victory, the Battle of Cnidus in which Conon defeated the Lacedaemonians in 394 BC. The Knidos Lion is now displayed under the roof of the Great Court in the British Museum.

</doc>
<doc id="79993" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79993" title="Nick Raynsford">
Nick Raynsford

Wyvill Richard Nicolls Raynsford (born 28 January 1945), known as Nick Raynsford, is a British Labour Party politician. A government minister from 1997 to 2005, he was the Member of Parliament (MP) for Greenwich & Woolwich from 1997 to 2015, having previously been MP for Greenwich from 1992 to 1997, and for Fulham from 1986 to 1987.
Early life.
He is the son of Wyvill Raynsford and Patricia Raynsford (née Dunn), and was brought up at Milton Manor in Milton Malsor. He was educated at Repton School and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a BA degree in History in 1966. He also has a Diploma in Art and Design from the Chelsea School of Art.
At university Raynsford was rusticated for a year for night climbing. In the course of this he had displayed a banner against the Vietnam War between the pinnacles of King's College Chapel.
Early career.
Raynsford was a councillor for the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham from 1971 to 1975. Before he was elected to Parliament he was Director of the Shelter Housing Aid Centre. He says a major reason he chose to seek parliamentary office was his involvement in campaigning for better provision for the homeless, achieved through the 1977 Homeless Persons Act. The 1977 Act extended local council responsibility "to provide accommodation for homeless people in their area," and instituted the right of homeless families to a permanent local council tenancy.
Member of Parliament.
Raynsford was first elected a Member of Parliament (MP) for the Labour Party in a by-election in Fulham Constituency in 1986, but at the 1987 General Election lost to Conservative candidate Matthew Carrington.
He then became MP for Greenwich at the 1992 general election, and at the 1997 general election he won the re-drawn seat of Greenwich & Woolwich. He retained the seat at the 2001, 2005 and 2010 general elections, with majorities of 13,433, 10,146 and 10,153 respectively.
In Opposition Raynsford was Shadow Minister for Housing and Construction from 1994, and front-bench spokesperson for London from 1993. From 1992–3 he was a member of the Environment Select Committee.
Raynsford joined the Government in 1997 and held responsibility for housing, planning and construction. During this time he was responsible for the implementation of the Decent Homes Standard. In 1997, there were 2.1m houses owned by local authorities and housing associations that didn't meet the Decent Homes Standard. By the end of 2010, 92% of social housing met the standard of being warm and weatherproof with reasonably modern facilities.
As Construction Minister Nick was credited with introducing building regulations which significantly improved standards, including making mandatory disabled access in new builds, increasing energy efficiency standards and fire safety. His position also included responsibility for the Fire Service and the creation of the London Resilience Forum to oversee London’s preparedness for dealing with emergencies (see Operation Sassoon). As Local Government Minister he led the Local Government Act 2000 through Parliament, which repealed the controversial Section 28.
As Minister for London, Raynsford was responsible for restoring democratic city-wide government to London, and the creation of the Greater London Authority and the commission of its home at City Hall. After the 2005 general election he returned to the backbenches.
In 2009 he publicly called for Gordon Brown to resign as Prime Minister, stating at the time, "I personally have considerable respect for Gordon Brown but his leadership is now so seriously damaged that I can't see the likelihood of him leading Labour successfully into the next general election. It's now appropriate for the party to look for a new leader”.
In Opposition again in the 2010 Parliament, he was a consistent critic of the Bedroom Tax, and in July 2014 co-sponsored the Affordable Homes Bill, which seeks to limit the impact of the Bedroom Tax on tenants in the social rented sector. He also co-chaired a Parliamentary inquiry into youth unemployment which encouraged the promotion of apprenticeships in the construction industry.
As a constituency MP, Raynsford promoted regeneration in the Greenwich Borough, including campaigns for the North Greenwich Station on the Jubilee Line, the extension of the DLR to Greenwich and Woolwich, and the campaign to secure a Crossrail Station in Woolwich, and support for bringing the Olympics to his constituency. He also advocated improved river crossings in East and South East London In May 2014 He expressed his opposition to a memorial to murdered soldier Lee Rigby, suggesting it "“would not in my view be helpful” because it “might attract undesirable interest from extremists”. Greenwich Council noted they had been "overwhelmed by interest in a local memorial”, but also opposed the tribute.
In 2013 Raynsford announced his intention to stand down as Greenwich and Woolwich MP at the next General Election, citing his age as a factor.
Additional work.
On 28 March 2010, The Sunday Times reported that Raynsford earns £9,000 per month from jobs in industries connected to his ministerial career. They focus around three areas of activity – housing, construction and local government – with which Raynsford has been involved throughout his working life.
Personal life.
He married Anne Jelley in 1968, and they had three daughters. They were divorced in 2011, and he is now the husband of Alison Seabeck, the former Labour MP for Plymouth Moor View. Raynsford's ancestry can be seen in Burke's Landed Gentry.

</doc>
<doc id="79994" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79994" title="Praxiteles">
Praxiteles

Praxiteles (; Greek: Πραξιτέλης, etymology: " he who finishes his works") of Athens, the son of Cephisodotus the Elder, was the most renowned of the Attic sculptors of the 4th century BC. He was the first to sculpt the nude female form in a life-size statue. While no indubitably attributable sculpture by Praxiteles is extant, numerous copies of his works have survived; several authors, including Pliny the Elder, wrote of his works; and coins engraved with silhouettes of his various famous statuary types from the period still exist.
A supposed relationship between Praxiteles and his beautiful model, the Thespian courtesan Phryne, has inspired speculation and interpretation in works of art ranging from painting (Gérôme) to comic opera (Saint-Saëns) to shadow play (Donnay).
Some writers have maintained that there were two sculptors of the name Praxiteles. One was a contemporary of Pheidias, and the other his more celebrated grandson. Though the repetition of the same name in every other generation is common in Greece, there is no certain evidence for either position.
Date.
Accurate dates for Praxiteles are elusive, but it is likely that he was no longer working in the time of Alexander the Great, in the absence of evidence that Alexander employed Praxiteles, as he probably would have done. Pliny's date, 364 BC, is probably that of one of his most noted works.
The subjects chosen by Praxiteles were either human beings or the less elderly and dignified deities such as Apollo, Hermes and Aphrodite rather than Zeus, Poseidon or Themis.
Praxiteles and his school worked almost entirely in marble. At the time the marble quarries of Paros were at their best; nor could any marble be finer for the purposes of the sculptor than that of which the Hermes from Olympia ("illustration"). Some of the statues of Praxiteles were coloured by the painter Nicias, and in the opinion of the sculptor they gained greatly by this treatment.
Hermes and the infant Dionysus.
In 1911, the "Encyclopaedia Britannica" noted that "Our knowledge of Praxiteles has received a great addition, and has been placed on a satisfactory basis, by the discovery at Olympia in 1877 of his statue of "Hermes with the Infant Dionysus", a statue which has become famous throughout the world." Later opinions have varied, reaching a low with the sculptor Aristide Maillol, who railed, "It's kitsch, it's frightful, it's sculpted in soap from Marseille". In 1948, Carl Blümel published it in a monograph as "The Hermes of "a" Praxiteles", reversing his earlier (1927) opinion that it was a Roman copy, finding it not 4th century either but referring it instead to a Hellenistic sculptor, a younger Praxiteles of Pergamon.
The sculpture was located where Pausanias had seen it in the late 2nd century AD. Hermes is represented in the act of carrying the child Dionysus to the nymphs who were charged with his rearing. The uplifted right arm is missing, but the possibility that the god holds out to the child a bunch of grapes to excite his desire would reduce the subject to a genre figure, C. Waldstein noted in 1882, remarking that Hermes looks past the child, "the clearest and most manifest outward sign of inward dreaming". The statue is today exhibited at the Archaeological Museum of Olympia.
Opposing arguments have been made that the statue is a copy by a Roman copyist. Since the Romans adopted much of Greek culture and art, this is a possibility. Mary Wallace suggested a 2nd-century date and a Pergamene origin on the basis of the sandal type. Other assertions have been attempted by scholars to prove the origins of the statue on the basis of the unfinished back, the appearance of the drapery, and the technique used with the drilling of the hair; however scholars cannot conclusively use any of these arguments to their advantage because exceptions exist in both Roman and Greek sculpture.
Apollo Sauroktonos.
Other works that appear to be copies of Praxiteles' sculpture express the same gracefulness in repose and indefinable charm as the 'Hermes and Infant Dionysus'. Among the most notable of these are the "Apollo Sauroktonos", or the lizard-slayer, which portrays a youth leaning against a tree and idly striking with an arrow at a lizard. Several Roman copies from the first century are known including those at the Louvre Museum, the Vatican Museums, and the National Museums Liverpool.
Also, the "Aphrodite of Cnidus" at the Vatican Museums is a copy of the statue made by Praxiteles for the people of Cnidus, and by them valued so highly that they refused to sell it to King Nicomedes in exchange for discharging the city's enormous debt (Pliny).
On June 22, 2004, the Cleveland Museum of Art (CMA), announced the acquisition of an ancient bronze sculpture of "Apollo Sauroktonos." The work is alleged to be the only near-complete original work by Praxiteles, though the dating and attribution of the sculpture will continue to be studied. The work was to be included in the 2007 Praxiteles exhibition organized by the Louvre Museum in Paris, but pressure from Greece, which disputes the work's provenance and legal ownership, caused the French to exclude it from the show.
Apollo Lykeios.
The Apollo Lykeios or Lycian Apollo, another Apollo-type reclining on a tree, is usually attributed to Praxiteles. It shows the god resting on a support (a tree trunk or tripod), his right arm touching the top of his head, and his hair fixed in braids on the top of a head in a haircut typical of childhood. It is called "Lycian" not after Lycia itself, but after its identification with a lost work described by Lucian as being on show in the "Lykeion", one of the gymnasia of Athens.
Capitoline Satyr.
The Resting Satyr of the Capitol at Rome has commonly been regarded as a copy of one of the Satyrs of Praxiteles, but it cannot be identified in the list of his works. Moreover, the style is hard and poor; a far superior replica exists in a torso in the Louvre. The attitude and character of the work are certainly of Praxitelean school.
Leto, Apollo and Artemis.
Excavations at Mantineia in Arcadia have brought to light the base of a group of Leto, Apollo and Artemis by Praxiteles. This base was doubtless not the work of the great sculptor himself, but of one of his assistants. Nevertheless, it is pleasing and historically valuable. Pausanias (viii. 9, I) thus describes the base, "on the base which supports the statues there are sculptured the Muses and Marsyas playing the flutes ("auloi")." Three slabs which have survived represent Apollo; Marsyas; a slave, and six of the Muses, the slab which held the other three having disappeared.
Leconfield Head.
The "Leconfield Head" (a head of the Aphrodite of Cnidus type, included in the 2007 exhibition at the Louvre) in the Red Room, Petworth House, West Sussex, UK, was claimed by Adolf Furtwängler to be an actual work of Praxiteles, based on its style and its intrinsic quality. The Leconfield Head, the keystone of the Greek antiquities at Petworth was probably bought from Gavin Hamilton in Rome in 1755.
Aberdeen Head.
The "Aberdeen Head", whether of Hermes or of a youthful Heracles, in the British Museum, is linked to Praxiteles by its striking resemblance to the "Hermes of Olympia".
Aphrodite of Cnidus.
Aphrodite of Cnidus was Praxiteles's most famous statue. It was the first time that a full-scale female figure was portrayed nude. Its renown was such, that it was immortalised in a lyric epigram:
"Paris did see me naked,<br>
"Adonis, and Anchises,<br>
"except I knew all three of them.<br>
"Where did the sculptor see me?"
Artemis of Antikyra.
According to Pausanias there was a statue of Artemis made by Praxiteles in her temple in Anticyra of Phokis. The appearance of the statue, which represented the goddess with a torch and an arch in her hands and a dog at her feet, is known from a 2nd-century BC bronze coin of the city.
Uncertain attributions.
Vitruvius (vii, praef. 13) lists Praxiteles as an artist on the Mausoleum of Maussollos and Strabo (xiv, 23, 51) attributes to him the whole sculpted decoration of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus. These mentions are widely considered as dubious.
Roman copies.
Besides these works, associated with Praxiteles by reference to notices in ancient writers, there are numerous copies of the Roman age, statues of Hermes, of Dionysus, of Aphrodite of Satyrs and Nymphs and the like, in which a varied expression of Praxitelean style may be discerned.

</doc>
<doc id="79995" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79995" title="Sly syndrome">
Sly syndrome

Sly syndrome, also called Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VII or MPS, is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme β-glucuronidase, a lysosomal enzyme. Sly syndrome belongs to a group of disorders known as mucopolysaccharidoses, which are lysosomal storage diseases. In Sly syndrome, the deficiency in β-glucuronidase leads to the accumulation of certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides) in many tissues and organs of the body.
It was named after its discoverer William S. Sly (1932-), an American Biochemist, in 1969 who has spent nearly his entire academic career at Saint Louis University.
Genetics.
The defective gene responsible for Sly syndrome is located on chromosome 7.
Symptoms.
The symptoms of Sly syndrome are similar to those of Hurler syndrome (MPS I). The symptoms include:
In addition recurrent pulmonary infections occur. Hepatomegaly occurs in the gastrointestinal system. Splenomegaly occurs in the hematopoietic system. Inborn mucopolysaccharide metabolic disorders due to β-glucuronidase deficiency with granular inclusions in granulocytes occurs in the biochemical and metabolic systems. Growth and motor skills are affected, and mental retardation also occurs.
Prevalence.
MPS type VII occurs in less than 1 in 250,000 births.
Other names.
Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VII is also known as β-glucuronidase deficiency, β-glucuronidase deficiency mucopolysaccharidosis,
GUSB deficiency, mucopolysaccharide storage disease VII, MCA, and MR.

</doc>
<doc id="79997" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79997" title="Igor Tamm">
Igor Tamm

Igor Yevgenyevich Tamm (; 8 July 1895 – 12 April 1971) was a Soviet physicist who received the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physics, jointly with Pavel Alekseyevich Cherenkov and Ilya Frank, for their 1934 discovery of Cherenkov radiation.
Biography.
According to Russian sources, Tamm had German noble descent on his father's side. His grandfather Theodor Tamm emigrated from Thuringia, and other sources describe him as Jewish. He studied at a gymnasium in Elisavetgrad (now Kirovohrad, Ukraine). In 1913–1914 he studied at the University of Edinburgh together with his school-friend Boris Hessen.
At the outbreak of World War I in 1914 he joined the army as a volunteer field medic. In 1917 he joined the Revolutionary movement and became an active anti-War campaigner, serving on revolutionary committees after the March Revolution. He returned to the Moscow State University from which he graduated in 1918.
Tamm married Nataliya Shuyskaya in September 1917. They eventually had two children, Irina (1921–2009, chemist) and Evgeny (1926–2008, experimental physicist and famous mountain climber, leader of the Soviet Everest expedition in 1982).
On 1 May 1923, Tamm began teaching physics at the Second Moscow State University. The same year, he finished his first scientific paper, "Electrodynamics of the Anisotropic Medium in the Special Theory of Relativity". In 1928, he spent a few months with Paul Ehrenfest at the University of Leiden. From 1934 until his death in 1971 Tamm was the head of the theoretical department at Lebedev Physical Institute in Moscow.
In 1932, Tamm published a paper with his proposal of the concept of surface states. This concept is important for MOSFET physics.
In 1934, Tamm and Semen Altshuller suggested that neutron has a non-zero magnetic moment, the idea was met with scepticism at that time, as the neutron was supposed to be an elementary particle with zero charge, and thus could not have a magnetic moment. The same year, Tamm coined an idea that proton-neutron interactions can be described as an exchange force transmitted by a yet unknown massive particle, this idea was later developed by Hideki Yukawa into a theory of meson forces.
In 1945 he developed an approximation method for many-body physics. As Sidney Dancoff developed it independently in 1950, it is now called the Tamm-Dancoff approximation.
He was the Nobel Laureate in Physics for the year 1958 together with Pavel Cherenkov and Ilya Frank for the discovery and the interpretation of the Cherenkov-Vavilov effect.
In late 1940s-early 1950s Tamm was involved in the Soviet thermonuclear bomb project, in 1949–1953 he spent most of his time in the "secret city" of Sarov, working as a head of the theoretical group developing the hydrogen bomb, however he retired from the project and returned to the Moscow Lebedev Physical Institute after the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb in 1953.
In 1951, together with Andrei Sakharov, Tamm proposed a tokamak system for the realization of CTF on the basis of toroidal magnetic thermonuclear reactor and soon after the first such devices were built by the INF. Results from the T-3 Soviet magnetic confinement device in 1968, when the plasma parameters unique for that time were obtained, showed temperatures in their machine to be over an order of magnitude higher than what was expected by the rest of the community. The western scientists visited the experiment and verified the high temperatures and confinement, sparking a wave of optimism for the prospects of the tokamak as well as construction of new experiments, which is still the dominant magnetic confinement device today.
Tamm was a student of Leonid Isaakovich Mandelshtam in science and life.
On Tamm's religious views, he was an atheist.
Tamm died in Moscow, Soviet Union, now Russia. The Lunar crater Tamm is named after him.

</doc>
<doc id="80000" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80000" title="Tables (board game)">
Tables (board game)

Tables is a general name given to a class of board games similar to backgammon, played on a board with two rows of 12 vertical markings called "points". Players roll dice to determine the movement of pieces. Tables games are among the oldest known board games, and many variants are played throughout the world.
History.
The ancient Egyptians played a game called Senet, which belonged to the same family of "race games" as modern tables games, with moves controlled by the roll of dice as early as 3500 BC. The Royal Game of Ur, played in ancient Mesopotamia, is another member of the family. Recent excavations at the "Burnt City" in Iran showed that a similar game existed there around 3000 BC. The artifacts include two dice and 60 pieces. The set is believed to be 100 to 200 years older than the sets found in Ur. Though they are all race games they cannot be direct ancestors of backgammon.
The τάβλη of Zeno's time is believed to be a direct descendant of the earlier ancient Roman "Ludus duodecim scriptorum" ("game of twelve lines" or, better, "game of twelve signs") with that board's middle row of points removed, and only the two outer rows remaining. Ludus duodecim scriptorum used a board with three rows of 12 points each, and the pieces were moved across all three rows according to the roll of three dice. The earliest known mention of the game is in Ovid's "Ars Amatoria" ("The Art of Love") (written between 1 BC and 8 AD).
In the 11th century Shahnameh, the Persian poet Ferdowsi credits Burzoe with the invention of "nard" in the 6th century. He describes an encounter between Burzoe and a Raja visiting from India. The Raja introduces the game of chess, and Burzoe demonstrates nard, played with dice made from ivory and teak.
In 1254, Louis IX issued a decree prohibiting his court officials and subjects from playing dice games. While it is mostly known for its extensive discussion of chess, the Alfonso X manuscript "Libro de los juegos", completed in 1283, describes rules for a number of dice and tables games.
In English, the word "tables" is derived from Latin "tabula". Its first use referring to board games documented by the Oxford English Dictionary was circa AD 700. 
Tables should not be confused with "Tafl", an unrelated class of board games (albeit linguistically related) played in medieval Scandinavia.
Tâb and tablan (as well as the related games sáhkku and daldøs) may, on the other hand, be descendants of tabula.
Middle East and Central Asia.
The game known in the West as backgammon is played widely in the Middle East and Central Asia. It is known as ifranjiah in Arabic (meaning "Frankish"), and is referred to as takhte nard in Iran. In many Arabic speaking countries, the game is known as "shesh besh", which is actually a combination for the sake of the rhyme of Persian "shesh" (six) and Turkish "besh" (five). Modern day Hebrew has borrowed this name from Arabic and backgammon is also called "shesh besh" in Israel.
The name nardshir comes from the Persian "nard" (Wooden block) and "shir" (lion) referring to the two type of pieces used in play. A common legend associates the game with the founder of the Sassanian dynasty, Ardashir I. The oldest known reference to the game is thought to be a passage in the Talmud.
Many of the early Arabic texts which refer to the game comment on the debate regarding the legality and morality of playing the game. This debate was settled by the eighth century when all four Muslim schools of jurisprudence declared the game to be Haraam (forbidden), however the game is still played today in many Arab countries.
Mahbusa.
Mahbusa means "imprisoned". Each player begins with 15 checkers on his opponent's 24-point. If a checker is hit, it is not placed on the bar, but instead, the hitting piece is placed on top, and the point is then controlled by the hitting player. The checker which has been hit is imprisoned and cannot be moved until the opponent removes his piece. Sometimes, a rule is used that requires a player to bring his first checker around to his home board before moving any others. In any case, a rapid advance to one's own home board is desirable, as imprisoning the opponent's checkers there is highly advantageous. Mahbusa is similar to "tapa".
An interesting feature of tables play in some Arab countries is that Persian numbers, rather than Arabic ones, are called out by a player announcing his dice rolls.
Narde.
People in the Iranian plateau and Caucasus region, especially in Azerbaijan, Iran, Armenia, Georgia, Uzbekistan and Russia, are very fond of playing narde. All 15 of a player's checkers are initially positioned on his own 24-point, but there is a major difference. One is forbidden to put his checker at a point occupied by one's opponent's checker, so there is no hitting or imprisonment in the long narde game. The main strategy is to secure playing "big pairs" by one's own checkers and prevent as much as possible doing the same by the opponent.
The game is known as 'Fevga' in Greece, 'Moultezim' in Turkey, Mahbusa in the Middle East and 'Ifranjiah' or "Frankish" in Arabia. It can also be spelt as 'Nard' or 'Nardi'.
A version known as "short narde" is a simplified form of Ifranjiah. In Georgia, ifranjiah is played as elsewhere, but called "nardi". In Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Russia many experienced players also play long narde, which some see as requiring deeper strategy.
Gul bara.
Gul bara, sometimes referred to as "rosespring backgammon" or "crazy narde", is a variant where there is no hitting.
Greece and Cyprus.
In Greece, tables games are called tavli (related to the word "tavla", meaning "board" or "table" or "tawleh" from Arabic, and cognate to the Latin "tabula"). "Tavli" was first described in an epigram of the Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476–481). There are three mainstream different games, portes, plakoto, and fevga: 
The three games are normally played consecutively, in three-, five- or seven-point matches.
There are also other variants like "Sfaktes" which means slayers, and "Evraiko" (Jewish), a much simpler game depending entirely on luck with no room for skill.
Japan.
There are two games known as "sugoroku" (双六) in Japan. One more closely resembles Snakes and Ladders, while the other is played on a 24-point tables board, using standard tables equipment. The starting position is identical to that of backgammon. It differs from most other tables variants in that the pieces are never borne off. Additionally, the use of primes is not permitted.
Romania.
In Romania, "tablă" (meaning "board", cognate of the Latin "tabula") is similar to backgammon, with two variations: there is no doubling cube and a backgammon counts only as a gammon (called "marţ"). Matches are usually played to three points.
Sweden.
Bräde or svenskt brädspel ("Swedish tables") is a variant played in Sweden. Players starts with all 15 of their checkers on opposite corners of the board, and play around counter-clockwise. Besides bearing off, there are several other ways to win, such as arranging all of one's checkers in certain pre-determined patterns, or by hitting so many checkers that one's opponent can not bring them in again. Additional points are awarded for a victory while one's opponent has checkers on the bar. Brädspel is played without the doubling cube. Interest in brädspel experienced a resurgence following the recovery of a 17th-century board from the wreck of the Vasa.
Turkey.
"Tavla" (from Medieval Greek τάβλη or from Arabic "tawleh"), is a tables game in Turkey very similar to backgammon. The major difference is in tavla the doubling cube is not used. Also in "tavla" both gammons and backgammons are counted as two points called "mars" and the players are not allowed to hit and run in their home boards as in backgammon. Matches are usually played to five points.
There are many variants of tavla in Turkey, where the course of play changes drastically. The usual tavla is also known as erkek tavlası meaning boys' or men's tavla. The other variant kız tavlası (meaning girls' tavla) is a game which depends only on the dice and involves no strategy. There is another variant called asker tavlası (meaning soldiers' tavla) where the pieces are thrown to the board randomly and the opponents try to flip their pieces over the opponents' pieces to beat them. The player with no pieces left loses the game. This variant doesn't involve dice at all and the play depends more on hand-eye coordination than tactical decision making. Üniversite tavlası (university tavla) is a variant of the game played with two or more tavlas and four or more players, with the players forming groups. The dice are thrown only by two opposing players and the rest must play the same dice. If a team member gets beaten and cannot enter, his team mates cannot play for that round. Although the dice are the same, the game on every board differs interestingly, where the case of one team member winning and another losing is very common. This variant is considered much harder because the player must take more than one play into account while only being capable of making decisions on his own board.
"Hapis" (Turkish for "prison") is another tables game played in Turkey. It is very similar to "Mahbusa" played in the Arab World.
Backgammon and variants.
In backgammon, two players move their pieces in opposing directions, according to the rolls of dice. The use of a doubling cube allows players to increase the stakes of the game. The basis of the modern game can be traced to Medieval and Renaissance sources. Backgammon has been studied considerably by computer scientists, who have developed software that plays at the level of top human players.
Tric-trac is a French variant of Backgammon. There are two main forms of the game, "le Grand Tric-trac" and "le Petit Tric-trac." In Tric-trac, the starting point is called a "talon", the points, or "fleches", are numbered to 12 on both sides of the board, with the 12th point on either side called the "coin de repos", or, simply, "coin". The 11th point (on either side) is often called "le case d'écolier", or 'schoolboy's point' ("case" meaning 'square', literally) after the tendency of inexperienced players to rush to this point too soon in the game. Statistically, the most difficult points in the game to reach aside from the "coins" are the 8th points, and they are named "les fleches de diable", or 'the Devil's points', for this reason. The home boards are referred to as the "jan de retour" by either player. Doubles are treated as two identical numbers, unlike backgammon proper.
Historic variants.
Many of the ancestors of modern tables games are no longer widely played.

</doc>
<doc id="80001" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80001" title="Shotacon">
Shotacon

, short for , is Japanese slang describing an attraction to young boys. It refers to a genre of manga and anime wherein pre-pubescent or pubescent male characters are depicted in a suggestive or erotic manner, whether in the obvious role of object of attraction, or the less apparent role of "subject" (the character the reader is designed to associate with), as in where the young male character is paired with a male, usually in a homoerotic manner, or with a female, in which the general community would call straight shota. It can also apply to postpubescent (adolescent or adult) characters with youthful neotenic features that would make them appear to be younger than they are. The phrase is a reference to the young male character from "Tetsujin 28-go" (reworked in English as "Gigantor"). The equivalent term for attraction to (or art pertaining to erotic portrayal of) young girls is lolicon.
The usage of the term in both Western and Japanese fan cultures includes works ranging from explicitly pornographic to mildly suggestive, romantic or in rare cases, entirely nonsexual, which is not usually classified as "true" shotacon. As with lolicon, shotacon is related to the concepts of "kawaii" (cuteness) and "moe" (in which characters are presented as young, cute or helpless in order to increase reader identification and inspire protective feelings). As such, shotacon themes and characters are used in a variety of non-erotic media. Elements of shotacon, like yaoi, are comparatively common in shōjo manga, such as the popular translated manga "Loveless" (which features an eroticized but unconsummated relationship between the 12-year-old male protagonist and his 20-year-old male "fighter unit"), or the young-appearing character Honey in "Ouran High School Host Club". Seinen manga, particularly that aimed at otaku, also occasionally presents eroticized adolescent males in a non-pornographic context, such as the cross-dressing 16-year-old boy in "Yubisaki Milk Tea".
Some critics claim that the shotacon genre contributes to actual sexual abuse of children, while others claim that there is no evidence for this, or that there is evidence to the contrary.
Origins.
The term "shotacon" is a Japanese bimoraic clipped compound of , a reference to the young male character Shōtarō (正太郎) from "Tetsujin 28-go". In the anime and manga series, Shōtarō is a bold, self-assertive detective who frequently outwits his adversaries and helps to solve cases. Throughout the series, Shōtarō develops close friends within the world. His bishōnen cuteness embodied and formed the term "shotacon", putting a name to an old sexual subculture.
Where the shotacon concept developed is hard to pinpoint, but some of its earliest roots are in reader responses to detective series written by Edogawa Rampo. In his works, a character named Yoshio Kobayashi of "Shōnentanteidan" (Junior Detective Group, similar to the Baker Street Irregulars of Sherlock Holmes) forms a deep dependency with adult protagonist Kogoro Akechi. Kobayashi, a beautiful teenager, constantly concerns himself with Kogoro's cases and well-being, and for a time moves in with the unmarried man. This nonsexual but intimate adult-boy relationship in part inspired the evolution of the shotacon community.
Tamaki Saitō describes the modern shotacon dōjinshi community as having largely formed in the early 1980s and having a roughly even split between males and females. Saitō suggests that shotacon was originally an offshoot of yaoi, but when adopted by male readers became influenced by lolicon; thus, he claims ""shota" texts by female "yaoi" authors are structurally identical to "yaoi" texts, while "shota" by male "otaku" clearly position these little boys as young girls with penises."
Shotacon publications.
Shotacon stories are commonly released in semi-monthly anthologies. Sometimes, however, manga artist will publish individual manga volumes. Many shotacon stories are published as doujinshi; , an annual convention to sell shotacon doujin material, was founded in 1995, apparently by a group of male creators. The 2008 Shotaket had over 1000 attendees and offered work from nearly 200 circles.
Shotacon for women is almost exclusively yaoi, and may be published in general yaoi anthology magazines or in one of the few exclusively shotacon yaoi anthologies, such as "Shōnen Romance". Because of the possible legal issues, US publishers of yaoi have avoided material depicting notably underage characters. In 2006, Juné released an English translation of Mako Takahashi's under the title "Almost Crying", a non-erotic shotacon manga; the book contains several stories featuring pubescent male characters, but their relationships are nonsexual.
Shotacon for male readers may feature either homosexual or heterosexual relationships. Both gay and straight shotacon typically involve escapades between smaller, often pubescent males and young adults (older brother/sister figures), sexually frustrated authority figures (teacher/boss), significantly older "uncle/aunt" figures (neighborhood acquaintances, actual family members), or outright father or mother figures (adopted, step, or full blood relation). Outside of these tropes, stories that involve only young boys (with no older characters) are not rare, with the most common recurring theme being a classmate relation.
Shota stories may be published in (a subset of) general seijin (men's pornographic) manga anthologies or in the few seijin shota manga anthologies, such as "Shōnen Ai no Bigaku", which specializes in male-male stories. Some gay men's magazines which offer a particularly broad mix of pornographic material occasionally run stories or manga featuring peri-pubescent characters.
In 2006, the seijin shotacon OVA anime , which the producer has described as the first shotacon anime, was released. It was later followed by three sequels. However, three years previously an OVA based on the eroge Enzai was created, featuring explicit sexual acts involving young boys.

</doc>
<doc id="80003" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80003" title="Satrap">
Satrap

Satraps were the governors of the provinces of the ancient Median and Achaemenid (Persian) Empires and in several of their successors, such as the Sasanian Empire and the Hellenistic empires.
The word satrap is also often used metaphorically in modern literature to refer to world leaders or governors who are heavily influenced by larger world superpowers or hegemonies and act as their surrogates.
Etymology.
The word "satrap" originates ultimately (via Ancient Greek and Latin) from Old Persian "xšaçapāvan" ("protector of the province"), Sanskrit "kshatrapam" () or "kshtrapa", from "xšaça" ("realm" or "province") and "pāvan" ("protector"). In Greek, the word was rendered as "satrápēs" ()—which later borrowed into Latin as —from a Western Iranian cognate "xšaθrapā(van)". In modern Persian the descendant of "xšaθrapāvan" is "shahrbān" (), but the components have undergone semantic shift so the word now means "town keeper" ("shahr" [] meaning "town" + "bān" [] meaning "keeper").
Medo-Persian satraps.
The first large scale use of satrapies, or provinces, originates from the conception of the First Persian Empire under Cyrus the Great, beginning at around 530 BCE. However, provincial organization originated during the Median era from at least 648 BCE.
Up to the time of the conquest of Media by Cyrus the Great, emperors ruled the conquered lands, through client kings and governors. The chief difference was that in Persian culture the concept of kingship was indivisible from divinity: divine authority validated the divine right of kings. The twenty-six satraps established by Cyrus were never kings, but viceroys ruling in the king's name, although in political reality many grabbed any chance to carve themselves an independent power base. Darius the Great gave the satrapies a definitive organization, increased their number to thirty-six and fixed their annual tribute (Behistun inscription)
The satrap was in charge of the land that he owned as an administrator, and found himself surrounded by an all-but-royal court; he collected the taxes, controlled the local officials and the subject tribes and cities, and was the supreme judge of the province before whose "chair" ("Nehemiah" 3:7) every civil and criminal case could be brought. He was responsible for the safety of the roads (cf. Xenophon), and had to put down brigands and rebels.
He was assisted by a council of Persians, to which also provincials were admitted; and was controlled by a royal secretary and by emissaries of the king, especially the "eye of the king" who made an annual inspection and exercised permanent control.
There were further checks on the power of each satrap: besides his secretarial scribe, his chief financial official (Old Persian "ganzabara") and the general in charge of the regular army of his province and of the fortresses were independent of him and reported directly to the "shah", periodically, in person. But the satrap was allowed to have troops in his own service.
The last great rebellions were put down by Artaxerxes III.
Hellenistic satraps.
The satrapic administration and title were retained—even for Greco-Macedonian incumbents—by Alexander the Great, who conquered the Achaemenid Empire, and by his successors, the Diadochi (and their dynasties) who carved it up, especially in the Seleucid Empire, where the satrap generally was designated as "strategos"; but their provinces were much smaller than under the Persians. They would ultimately be replaced by conquering empires, especially the Parthians.
Parthian and Sassanian satraps.
In the Parthian Empire, the king's power rested on the support of noble families who ruled large estates, and supplied soldiers and tribute to the king. City-states within the empire enjoyed a degree of self-government, and paid tribute to the king. Administration of the Sassanid Empire was considerably more centralized than that of the Parthian Empire; the semi-independent kingdoms and self-governing city states of the Parthian Empire was replaced with a system of "royal cities" which served as the seats of centrally appointed governors called "shahrabs" as well as the location of military garrisons. "Shahrabs" ruled both the city and the surrounding rural districts. Exceptionally, the East Roman Empire also adopted the title "satrap" for the semi-autonomous princes that governed one of its Armenian provinces, the "Satrapiae".
Western satraps.
The Western Satraps or Kshatrapas (35-405 CE) were Saka rulers in the western and central part of the Sindh region of Pakistan, and the Saurashtra and Malwa regions of western India. They were contemporaneous with the Kushans who ruled the northern part of the subcontinent from the area of Peshawar and were possibly their overlords, and with the Satavahana (Andhra) who ruled in central India to their south and east and the Kushan state to their immediate west.

</doc>
<doc id="80007" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80007" title="Chief financial officer">
Chief financial officer

The chief financial officer (CFO) or chief financial and operating officer (CFOO) is a corporate officer primarily responsible for managing the financial risks of the corporation. This officer is also responsible for financial planning and record-keeping, as well as financial reporting to higher management. In some sectors the CFO is also responsible for analysis of data. The title is equivalent to finance director (FD), a common title in the United Kingdom. The CFO typically reports to the chief executive officer and to the board of directors, and may additionally sit on the board.
The CFO supervises the finance unit and is the chief financial spokesperson for the organization. The CFO reports directly to the president/chief executive officer (CEO) and directly assists the chief operating officer (COO) on all strategic and tactical matters as they relate to budget management, cost–benefit analysis, forecasting needs and the securing of new funding.
Qualification.
Most CFOs of large companies have finance qualifications such as a Master of Business Administration, Master of Science, or come from an accounting background such as a Certified Public Accountant. A finance department would usually contain some accountants with Certified Public Accountant, Chartered Accountant, Certified Management Accountant, Chartered Certified Accountant, or equivalent status such as master of finance.
Federal government of the United States.
The federal government of the United States has incorporated more elements of business-sector practices in its management approaches, including the use of the CFO position (alongside, for example, an increased use of the chief information officer post, within public agencies). 
The Chief Financial Officers Act, enacted in 1990, created a chief financial officer in each of 23 federal agencies. This was intended to improve the government's financial management and develop standards of financial performance and disclosure. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) holds primary responsibility for financial management standardization and improvement. Within OMB, the Deputy Director for Management, a position was established by the CFO Act, is the chief official responsible for financial management.
The Office of Federal Financial Management (OFFM) is specifically charged with overseeing financial management matters, establishing financial management policies and requirements, and monitoring the establishment and operation of federal financial management systems. OFFM is led by a controller. 
The CFO Act also established the CFO Council, chair by the OMB Deputy Director for Management and including the CFOs and Deputy CFOs of 23 federal agencies, the OFFM controller, and the Fiscal Assistant Secretary, the head of the Office of Fiscal Service of the Department of the Treasury. Its mandate is to work collaboratively to improve financial management in the U.S. government and "advise and coordinate the activities of the agencies of its members" in the areas of financial management and accountability. 
OMB Circular A-123 (issued 21 December 2004) defines the management responsibilities for internal financial controls in federal agencies and addressed to all federal CFOs, CIOs and Program Managers. The circular is a re-examination of the existing internal control requirements for federal agencies and was initiated in light of the new internal control requirements for publicly traded companies contained in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002.
While significant progress in improving federal financial management has been made since the federal government began preparing consolidated financial statements, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) reported that "major impediments continue to prevent from rendering an opinion." In December 2006, the GAO announced that for the 10th consecutive year, the GAO was prevented from expressing an opinion on the consolidated financial statements of the government due to a number of material weaknesses related to financial systems, fundamental recordkeeping, and financial reporting.
At the same time, in calendar year 2007, the CFOC announced that for the second consecutive year, every major federal agency completed its Performance and Accountability Report just 45 days after the end of the fiscal year (2006).
Changing role.
In recent years, the role of the CFO has evolved significantly. Traditionally being viewed as a financial gatekeeper, the role of the CFO has expanded and evolved to a strategic partner and advisor to the CEO. In fact, in a report released by McKinsey, 88 percent of 164 CFOs surveyed reported that CEOs expect them to be more active participants in shaping the strategy of their organizations. Half of them also indicated that CEOs counted on them to challenge the company’s strategy.
According to one source, "The CFO of tomorrow should be a big-picture thinker, rather than detail-oriented, outspoken rather than reserved, prefer to delegate rather than be hands-on, emphasize what gets done rather than how things are done, and make collaborative rather than unilateral decisions. The CFO must serve as the financial authority in the organization, ensuring the integrity of fiscal data and modeling transparency and accountability. The CFO is as much a part of governance and oversight as the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), playing a fundamental role in the development and critique of strategic choices. The CFO is now expected to be a key player in stockholder education and communication and is clearly seen as a leader and team builder who sets the financial agenda for the organization, supports the CEO directly and provides timely advice to the board of directors." 
The uneven pace of recovery worldwide has made it more challenging for many companies. CFOs are increasingly playing a more critical role in shaping their company’s strategies today, especially in light of the highly uncertain macroeconomic environments, where managing financial volatilities is becoming a centerpiece for many companies' strategies, based on a survey held by Clariden Global. CFOs are increasingly being relied upon as the owners of business information, reporting and financial data within organizations and assisting in decision support operations to enable the company to operate more effectively and efficiently.
The duties of a modern CFO now straddle the traditional areas of financial stewardship and the more progressive areas of strategic and business leadership with direct responsibility and oversight of operations (which often includes procurement) expanding exponentially. This significant role-based transformation, which is well underway, is best-evidenced by the “CEO-in-Waiting” status that many CFOs now hold. Additionally, many CFOs have made the realization that an operating environment that values cash, profit margins, and risk mitigation is one that plays to the primary skills and capabilities of a procurement organization, and become increasingly involved (directly via oversight or indirectly through improved collaboration) with the procurement function according to a recent research report that looks at the CFO's relationship with procurement.

</doc>
<doc id="80009" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80009" title="CFO (disambiguation)">
CFO (disambiguation)

CFO may refer to:
also:

</doc>
<doc id="80018" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80018" title="Meal">
Meal

A meal is an eating occasion that takes place at a certain time and includes specific, prepared food, or the food eaten on that occasion. The names used for specific meals in English vary greatly, depending on the speaker's culture, the time of day, or the size of the meal.
Meals occur primarily at homes, restaurants, and cafeterias, but may occur anywhere. Regular meals occur on a daily basis, typically several times a day. Special meals are usually held in conjunction with such occasions as birthdays, weddings, anniversaries, and holidays. A meal is different from a snack in that meals are generally larger, more varied, and more filling than snacks.
Common meals.
Mealtimes.
The type of meal served or eaten at any given time varies by custom and location. In most modern cultures, three main meals are eaten: in the morning, early afternoon, and evening. Further, the names of meals are often interchangeable by custom as well. Some serve dinner as the main meal at midday, with supper as the late afternoon/early evening meal; while others may call their midday meal lunch and their early evening meal supper. Except for "breakfast", these names can vary from region to region or even from family to family.

</doc>
