<doc id="82305" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82305" title="Nanyang Technological University">
Nanyang Technological University

Nanyang Technological University (Abbreviation: NTU) is one of the three largest public and autonomous universities in Singapore.
NTU was inaugurated in 1991, when its predecessor institution, the Nanyang Technological Institute (NTI) merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE). NTU has since grown to become a full-fledged comprehensive and research-intensive university, with over 33,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students. The University is organized into eight colleges and schools. They are the College of Engineering, College of Science, College of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, Nanyang Business School, and the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine - set up jointly with Imperial College London. NTU is also home to the National Institute of Education, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Earth Observatory of Singapore, Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering and the Institute on Asian Consumer Insight.
Despite being a young university, NTU is consistently ranked among the world's best in various college and university rankings. In the 2015 QS World University Rankings, NTU was ranked 13th globally and 2nd in Asia. The University was also ranked 1st in the world in the global young university rankings, according to the QS Top 50 Under 50. The College of Engineering at NTU is also ranked 6th in the world in the 2015 QS World University Rankings by Faculty. The NTU Nanyang MBA is Singapore's No.1 MBA programme having placed 29th worldwide in the 2016 Financial Times Global MBA Rankings and 59th globally (2nd in Asia) by The Economist Intelligence Unit for full-time MBA Rankings in 2015. For 12 consecutive years, Nanyang Business School has been ranked the best in Singapore by The Economist. The university also has 10 Nobel laureates and a Fields Medalist on its panel of international advisers.
The university's main campus covers 200 hectares of land, making it the largest university campus in Singapore. The main campus grounds are located in the south-western part of the Western Water Catchment just adjacent to the catchment's western boundary with the town of Jurong West. NTU also has two other campuses, one in Novena and another at one-north.
History.
Nanyang Technological Institute (1981-1991).
Nanyang Technological Institute (NTI) was set up on 1 August 1981 with a charter to train three-quarters of Singapore’s engineers. 
When NTI started in 1982, it had a total student population of 582 in three engineering disciplines – civil and structural, electrical and electronic, and mechanical and production engineering. By 1990, the institute’s undergraduate student population had grown to 6,832. The first two graduate students were admitted in 1986.
Three engineering schools were added, and the School of Accountancy from the National University of Singapore was transferred to NTI in 1987. A school of applied science was also started. 
In 1990, the government announced that the Institute of Education would be merged with the College of Physical Education to form the National Institute of Education and that it would be part of the new NTU upon its establishment in 1991.
Despite the similar name, it is not related to Nanyang University ("南大"), the local Chinese-medium tertiary institution which merged with the University of Singapore in 1980 to form the National University of Singapore. NTI was established the following year and took over the former Nanyang University's buildings.
Present form: Nanyang Technological University (1991-present).
In 1991, NTI merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE) to form Nanyang Technological University (NTU). The alumni rolls of the former Nanyang University were transferred to NTU in 1996.
NTU became autonomous in 2006 and is today one of the three largest public universities in Singapore.
Campuses.
Yunnan Garden Campus.
NTU's primary campus is the 200-hectare (2.0 km2; 0.772 sq mi) Yunnan Garden Campus which is situated adjacent to the town of Jurong West. It is the largest university campus on the island of Singapore, housing Singapore's largest on-campus residence infrastructure including 18 halls of residence for undergraduates and two graduate halls. NTU's Yunnan Garden Campus has also been named one of the Top 15 Most Beautiful Campuses in the World.
The campus grounds were originally donated by the Singapore Hokkien Association to Nanyang University, a Chinese-medium university inaugurated in 1953. In 1980, the Government of Singapore merged Nanyang University with the University of Singapore to form the present-day National University of Singapore. The following year, the Nanyang University grounds were granted to the Nanyang Technological Institute, a newly formed English-medium engineering college. In 1991, NTI merged with the National Institute of Education (NIE), Singapore's main teaching college, to form the present-day Nanyang Technological University.
The former Nanyang University administration building was beautifully restored into the Chinese Heritage Centre and was gazetted as a national monument in 1998 - now overlooking the historical Yunnan Garden. The Nanyang University Memorial and original Nanyang University Arch were also declared national monuments of Singapore in 1998. The NTU Art & Heritage Museum is an approved public museum under the National Heritage Board’s Approved Museum Scheme; benefactors who donate artworks and artefacts to NTU enjoy double tax deductions. There is a small lake between the Chinese Heritage Centre and Hall of Residence 4 called Nanyang Lake. Only members of NTU Anglers' Club permit holder, the fishing club at NTU, are allowed to fish in this lake.
In 2008, the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, one of the world’s largest foundations for entrepreneurship, selected NTU as the first Kauffman campus outside of the US.
The campus also served as the Youth Olympic Village for the inaugural Youth Olympic Games in 2010.
Singapore's first eco-business park, CleanTech Park, is situated next to NTU's main campus. It is proposed to be developed in three phases with an estimated completion year of 2030. The park's first multi-tenanted building, CleanTech One, was opened in October 2010. CleanTech One's tenants include those from the public sector (the Nanyang Environment & Water Research Institute (NEWRI), the Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), and the Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore), as well as from the private sector (DHI Water & Environment, Toray Industries, Silecs International, CIMA Nanotech, Diamond Energy, the Sustainable Energy Association of Singapore (SEAS), Yingli Solar, and Pfizer).
NTU@one-north.
NTU@one-north is located at the one-north business park, and is home to the NTU Alumni Clubhouse. It comprises two wings with educational and recreational facilities primarily allowing the university to enhance its delivery of continuing education programmes through the Centre for Continuing Education and Confucius Institute of NTU.
The educational facilities include a 215-seat auditorium, an 80-seat lecture theatre, six 45-seat lecture theatres, twenty-one 18 to 50-seat seminar rooms, three 18 to 27-seat computer rooms and eight 6-seat discussion rooms. Alumni clubhouse facilities include a fun pool, a Chinese restaurant, games arcade, wine bar, lounge, karaoke rooms, games rooms, gymnasium, childcare centre and SPA. The Campus is also home to NTU's Centre for Continuing Education and the Confucius Institute of NTU. Its close proximity to the city means that it is more convenient for alumni to gather and connect with the university.
Novena Campus.
A third campus, Novena Campus, is situated close to LKCMedicine’s partner teaching hospital, Tan Tock Seng Hospital in downtown Novena. The new 20-storey Clinical Sciences Building is expected to be completed in 2016. The CSB will also be home to LKCMedicine researchers, with the laboratories interconnected through collaborative spaces.
Living Spaces.
On-campus housing is located within NTU's Yunnan Garden Campus.
Undergraduate Halls.
NTU has 18 Halls of Residence for undergraduates, each with a capacity of between 500 & 659 residents. They accommodate more than 10,000 local and international students, with every freshman guaranteed a hostel room. Under the Campus Master Plan, an additional 3,750 students will be able to experience hostel life by mid 2016.
All halls are co-ed by floor or wing and offer single and double occupancy rooms which are fully furnished. Double rooms are shared by residents of the same gender. With the exception of Halls 1 & 2 which offer shared suite-style attached shower and toilets, all halls have gender specific communal showers and toilets. All rooms at Halls 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 & 16 are fitted with air-conditioners on a pay-for-use basis. Selected rooms at Crescent Hall & Pioneer Hall are fitted with air-conditioners, also on a pay-for-use basis. Every hall also has communal facilities like lounges, air-conditioned reading rooms, pantries, and laundry rooms with washing machines and dryers.
Graduate Halls.
On-campus graduate housing is available at two on-campus graduate halls - Graduate Hall 1 and Graduate Hall 2, with a capacity of 476 and 852 respectively. All rooms are fully furnished with a bed, wardrobe, desk, fan, air-conditioning and internet connection. Communal facilities like pantries and laundry rooms with washing machines and dryers are also available to residents.
Faculty Housing.
Faculty Housing consists of five clusters made up of apartment blocks, maisonettes, semi-detached houses and bungalows. There is also a wide variety of housing types consisting of 1 bedroom, 2 bedroom, 3 bedroom and duplex units. The floor areas range from 55 sqm to 200 sqm. All the faculty housing are surrounded by greenery, and each cluster has its own exclusive setting and view.
Internet learning on campus.
The University is connected to the high speed Internet. All the facilities and resources available over the Internet are accessible by anyone on the campus network. The campus network, which links together all computing systems on the campus, is managed by the University's Centre for IT Services.
To supplement the fixed-line campus network, NTU implemented a campus-wide wireless network in 2000. This high-speed wireless network, capable of a transfer rate of up to 11 megabits per second, enables NTU staff and students equipped with mobile devices such as notebooks, PCs and PDAs to access all networked services from practically anywhere on the campus without the need of a hardwired network connection. However services like torrents are still blocked.
NTU provides e-learning services, which is based on BlackBoard technology, provides the framework and eco-system for learning and teaching. Besides providing a repository of lecture recordings, lecture notes, it also facilitates learning activities for collaboration, discussion, assessment and project work. During term time, the usage typically by faculty and students exceeds nine-million page views weekly (Jan 2010).
Colleges, Schools and Institutes.
NTU is organised into several colleges and schools, each corresponding to different fields of study. The various engineering schools, which were consolidated to form the College of Engineering in 2001, together with Nanyang Business School, the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information and the National Institute of Education, have been part of NTU from its inception. More recently, NTU has established additional schools for the Biological Sciences (2001), Humanities and Social Sciences (2004), Physical & Mathematical Sciences (2005), and Art, Design and Media (2009). In 2013, NTU and Imperial College London jointly established a new medical school, the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, which is based in the Novena campus along 11 Mandalay Road.
NTU also hosts a number of autonomous institutes: the National Institute of Education, the S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, and two recently established research institutes.
Nanyang Business School.
Nanyang Business School (NBS) is the largest business school in Singapore with over 4,400 undergraduates and postgraduates pursuing degrees in Accountancy and Business, as well as one of the world's top MBA programmes. The faculty consists of over 160 professors from more than 20 countries. NBS is the only business school in Singapore to offer the 3-year direct-honours single degree programme in Business or Accountancy. NBS' widely popular double degree programme in Accountancy and Business can be completed within 3.5 – 4 years, and the newly introduced integrated Bachelor & Master's programme takes 4 years to complete. Students enrolled into the Business programme are allowed to specialise in their penultimate year of study in one of six areas, namely: Actuarial Science, Banking & Finance, Business Analytics, Human Resource Consulting, Marketing, Risk Management and Insurance. Those who choose to major in Banking & Finance have the option to choose one of three specialised tracks which include the 'International Trading' option.
The business school also provides undergraduates with the opportunity to go on a semester-long exchange, on top of overseas study missions and compulsory internships. Graduate programmes offered by NBS include the top-ranked Nanyang MBA, Nanyang Executive MBA, MSc Accountancy, and MSc Financial Engineering.
College of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences.
It consists of three schools.
College of Engineering.
The College of Engineering is NTU's largest subdivision. It is claimed to be the world's largest engineering college, with a student population of more than 10,500 undergraduates and 3,500 graduates. It consists of six schools (Chemical and Biomedical, Civil and Environmental, Computer, Electrical and Electronic, Materials Science, Mechanical and Aerospace) focused on technology and innovation.
The college offers a rich array of multidisciplinary programmes and specialisations in traditional engineering disciplines and beyond. In addition to the 12 single degree programmes, the college also offers double degrees, double majors and integrated programmes as well as the only aerospace engineering programme in Singapore.
College of Science.
Today, the college consists of three schools and is home to about 150 faculty members (more than 15 of which are Singapore National Research Foundation Fellows), 340 research staff, 110 administrative and technical staff, 4,000 undergraduate and 750 graduate students.
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine.
The Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine was established in 2013 in collaboration with Imperial College London. Prior to its opening in 2013, the school received record donations of S$400 million, including S$150 million from the Lee Foundation. The School’s primary clinical partner is the National Healthcare Group.
Interdisciplinary Graduate School.
NTU's Interdisciplinary Graduate School focuses on the key research areas within NTU's Peaks of Excellence in Sustainable Earth, New Media and Future Healthcare. Research in these areas span across different disciplines beyond the conventional school-based programmes. IGS leverages on professors from all the schools and colleges in NTU to undertake interdisciplinary research and to act as advisors for IGS PhD students.
Autonomous Institutes.
NTU hosts a number of autonomous research and educational institutes.
Academics.
Undergraduate Education.
NTU has a total undergraduate population of around 24,300. Approximately 80% of undergraduates are Singaporean citizens and permanent residents. The remaining 20% of international students are mostly from the ASEAN nations, China, and India.
When applying for admission to NTU, applicants are required to specify one (or more) of NTU's schools in which to study. Applicants are offered admission by the individual schools, which have varying admission criteria (after admission, it is possible to appeal for a transfer between schools). Applicants from Singapore must have graduated from a junior college or polytechnic. International students are required to have completed K-12 education; furthermore, as English is the medium of instruction at NTU, students from non-English speaking countries may be required to have an English language proficiency certificate such as IELTS or TOEFL.
Undergraduate tuition is heavily subsidised by the Government of Singapore. Singaporean citizens pay around 27 percent of the base tuition cost. A reduced subsidy is optionally available to Singaporean permanent residents and international students, but with a stipulation: the recipients are contractually required to work for a Singapore-based company for three years after graduation.
NTU also offers a variety of undergraduate scholarships to new as well as current students pursuing their full-time undergraduate studies in the university. Scholarships are generally awarded to students based on academic merit and good co-curricular records.
Premier Scholars Programmes.
NTU's Premier Scholars Programmes (PSP), comprising the University Scholars Programme (USP), Renaissance Engineering Programme (REP), CN Yang Scholars Programme (CNYSP) and NTU-NIE Teaching Scholars Programme (TSP), aim to attract the high-achieving post-secondary students with outstanding co-curricular records, leadership qualities and a strong passion to contribute to society. On top of a multidisciplinary and broad-based curriculum, these students will also have personal guidance by top faculty, interdisciplinary and intensive research opportunities, overseas exposure, as well as meeting renowned Nobel Laureates and other world class leading scientists, politicians and industry leaders. Students who are under the CNYSP, USP and TSP will, upon their graduation, be awarded a special certificate in addition to their degree certificate.
The University Scholars Programme (USP) leads a University-wide commitment to provide an intellectually stimulating and enriching academic environment for the best students of NTU. The programme includes an exciting multidisciplinary curriculum that compliments their core curriculum and supplements their general education programme. From ethics to quantitative reasoning, from religions of the world to astronomy, USP offers a wide range of courses, special events, and learning opportunities each year that promise to broaden students’ perspectives and challenge their creative thinking and analytical ability.
The Renaissance Engineering Programme (REP) is an integrated, rigorous and fully residential programme with a curriculum that covers a broad spectrum of multidisciplinary subjects bridging Engineering, Business and the Liberal Arts which includes Sciences, Mathematics, Engineering Technology Management, and interdisciplinary studies. This programme includes a one-year fully-fledged overseas experience at a partnering university such as University of California, Berkeley or Imperial College London with an Industrial Orientation in Year 3, and it awards a dual-degree comprising Bachelor of Engineering Science degree (with specialisation in a chosen engineering discipline) and Master of Science in Technology Management in 4.5 years.
The CN Yang Scholars Programme (CNYSP), named in honour of Professor CN Yang (1957 Nobel Laureate in Physics), is a programme that is specially designed for exceptional students with a deep passion in science and engineering for the high-technology world of the 21st century. The programme provides a strong and broad foundation in the basics of science, mathematics and engineering so as to empower the students to delve deeper into any discipline in science and engineering. Students are given unique opportunities to broaden their experience by being engaged in cutting edge research within NTU. At the end of their undergraduate studies, CNYSP graduates are also given an option to pursue postgraduate studies (PhD) with a scholarship and overseas lab attachment.
The NTU-NIE Teaching Scholars Programme (TSP) is the latest addition to the existing suite of scholar programmes in NTU. It is a premier scholars programme aimed at preparing tomorrow’s leaders of education who possess the passion and aspiration to inspire, nurture and lead our next generation. The programme offers a unique opportunity for both personal development and international exposure in interdisciplinary training through seminars, conference presentations, research assignments and mentorship, internships, and overseas programmes. Graduates of TSP will be well-equipped with intellectual rigour, strong leadership and global perspectives – ready to fulfil their aspirations in education and make their contribution in shaping the future of the nation.
Post-graduate Education.
NTU has approximately 10,000 graduate students pursuing Master's degrees, doctorates, and other post-graduate degrees. The graduate student population is largely international.
The admission requirements for post-graduate studies vary with the school and the course of study. Several programmes require GRE or GMAT scores; typical minimum scores are 320 (GRE verbal/quantitative), 3.5 (GRE analytical), and 600 (GMAT), but these can vary widely between different schools. Applicants from non-English speaking countries are typically required to submit TOEFL or IELTS scores; typical minimum scores are 6.0 (IETL) and 90 (Internet-based TOEFL).
Clubs & Communities.
NTU provides rich opportunities for groups and communities to form and grow, as well as supports the forming and organisation of student activities to provide a platform to share knowledge and experiences.
Currently, there are more than 100 student organisations in NTU.
University Rankings.
NTU has performed exceptionally well in the various university rankings published worldwide, and was named the world's fastest-rising young university by the Times Higher Education in April 2015. NTU has been ranked 13th in the world and 2nd in Asia in the latest 2015 QS World University Rankings. NTU also came in 1st overall in the ranking of young universities for the second consecutive year according to the 2015 QS Top 50 Under 50. In 2011, NTU became the first university in Asia to receive the maximum five stars under the QS Stars evaluation system.
QS World University Rankings
In 2015, NTU's Faculty of Engineering and Technology was ranked 6th in the world and 2nd in Asia by the QS World University Rankings by Faculty 2015. NTU also has a research citation that is among the top four in the world, with its research output being ranked among the top three universities globally in Engineering by Essential Science Indicators of Thomson Reuters. In the 2015 QS World University Rankings by Faculty, NTU is ranked 22nd in the world for Social Sciences and Management, up 11 places from the previous year. This includes the Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Business School and School of Humanities and Social Sciences. In the field of Natural Sciences, NTU's College of Science jumped 44 spots to rank 15th in the world while Art & Humanities leapt 41 places to emerge 45th globally.
In the recent QS World University Rankings by Subject published on 21 March 2016, NTU had 19 subjects in the world's top 50, with two subjects in the global top 10. It also came in first in Asia in Materials Science.
Times Higher Education World University Rankings
In 2015, NTU rose to 55th position worldwide and 6th in Asia in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings with strong scores in all the categories measured, particularly for research, citations, international outlook as well as industry income and innovation. As a result, NTU rocketed a total of 114 places in the past four years in the THE rankings. NTU is also ranked 2nd best among the global young universities under 50 years old.
Other rankings
Separately, the Academic Ranking of World Universities published by the Shanghai Ranking Consultancy that ranks universities' research performance and places a high weightage on the number of Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals won by a university’s alumni and faculty placed NTU in the range of 151-200th worldwide and 2nd in Singapore. However, this ranking methodology has proven to be inherently biased against young universities like NTU. As of May 2015, Microsoft Academic Search website ranks NTU's overall engineering as the 8th in the world for the last 5 years, according to the number publications and H-Index criteria.
NTU's Nanyang MBA is Singapore's No.1 MBA programme, having ranked 29th worldwide in the 2016 Financial Times Global MBA Rankings and 59th globally (2nd in Asia) by The Economist Intelligence Unit for full-time MBA Rankings in 2015. For the 12th straight year, Nanyang Business School has been ranked the best in Singapore by The Economist. Also, NBS is placed 10th worldwide in the Financial Times’ (FT) rankings of the world’s top 100 Executive MBA (EMBA) programmes. Accounting research at NBS is rated 7th in the world and remained No. 1 in Asia by the Brigham Young University (BYU) Accounting Research Rankings released in April 2014. NTU Professor Tan Hun Tong is currently the world's top accounting researcher for the third year running while Professor Clive Lennox is ranked 7th in the world and 2nd in Asia. Notably, Professor Vijay Sethi was voted the world's best business professor as the sole recipient of the prestigious Business Professor of the Year award from The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) in March 2013, beating top business professors from Harvard Business School, Wharton Business School and London Business School.
The S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies has been ranked second among university-affiliated think-tanks in Asia and 22nd internationally.
NTU has many multi-national programmes and initiatives with institutions worldwide. Some examples of key partners include MIT, Stanford University, Cornell University, Caltech, University of Washington, Carnegie Mellon University; world-class universities in Asia such as Beijing University, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Waseda, IIT of India; European universities like Cambridge University, Imperial College London, Warwick University, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Karolinska Institutet, University of Mannheim, Heidelberg University and Technische Universität München; and Israeli Universities like Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
NTU is also the first Kauffman Campus outside the United States, spearheading entrepreneurship in Asia.
Degrees awarded by NTU.
Bachelor's degrees:
Higher degrees:
Controversies.
Renaming Controversy.
Although NTU occupies the grounds of the former Nanyang University (NU), and has a similar name, it is not a direct continuation of that institution. In 1980, the Government of Singapore forcibly merged Nanyang University with the University of Singapore to form the present-day National University of Singapore (NUS). This was a source of significant discontent amongst NU students and alumni, because NU had been a Chinese-medium university, whereas the newly merged NUS was (and is) an English-medium university.
As NTU subsequently grew into a full university, various efforts were made to have it claim the Nanyang University mantle. In 1996, the alumni rolls of Nanyang University were transferred from NUS to NTU. In 1998, the prominent local calligrapher and poet Pan Shou, who had been the first vice-chancellor of Nanyang University, called for NTU to be renamed Nanyang University, as a way to "quieten the hearts of many" NU alumni. In 2003, this idea received further support from NTU president Su Guaning, during an interview with the Chinese-language paper Lianhe Zaobao. One reason oferred for the renaming was that, by the mid-2000s, NTU no longer had a narrow focus on technical subjects, but had become a full university including studies in the humanities.
However, the NTU administration's renaming plans soon encountered significant push-back. One NU alumni, Zhu Yong-an, circulated the results of a straw poll in which NU alumni came out strongly against the idea; respondents complained that NTU could not provide "continuity" for the "murdered" Nanyang University. Finally, after Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong weighed in on the affair, the administration dropped the idea quietly in 2006 and has not raised it since.
Tenural Denial to Cherian George.
In 2013, there was a debate over academic freedom in Singapore when Associate Professor Cherian George, an outspoken academic at the Wee Kim Wee School of Communications who had publicly criticised Singapore's system of media control and its ruling People’s Action Party. did not get tenured. Although George had been recommended for tenure by the Wee Kim Wee School, his application was turned down by a university-level committee which included representatives from the Government of Singapore. One of the reviewers for the tenure case, Cardiff University's professor Karin Wahl-Jorgensen, expressed outrage at NTU's decision, and George's thesis advisor, Stanford University's Theodore Glasser, raised doubts about "NTU's reputation as a university of international standing" and "NTU's commitment to academic freedom". Despite a petition against the tenure decision by students at the Wee Kim Wee School, George's appeal against the tenure decision was subsequently rejected by the university.

</doc>
<doc id="82318" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82318" title="The Swatch Group">
The Swatch Group

Swatch Group Ltd. designs, manufactures, distributes and sells finished watches, watch movements, prestige watch components, electronic systems and luxury jewelry. Based in Biel, Switzerland, The Swatch Group was formed in 1983 through merger of two Swiss watch manufacturers: ASUAG and SSIH. Formerly SMH Swiss Corporation for Microelectronics and Watchmaking Industries Ltd, the company took its present name in 1998. The Swatch Group is led by G. Nicolas (Nick) Hayek, Jr., son of the late co-founder and chairman Nicolas Hayek.
In 2015, net sales were CHF 8.451 billion, down 3.0% on 2014 results.
Worldwide, The Swatch Group employs over 36,000 people in 50 countries.
History.
The Swatch Group formed from two financially troubled predecessor companies, SSIH and ASUAG.
SSIH.
SSIH originated in 1930 with the merger of the Omega and Tissot companies. Swiss watch quality was high, but new technology such as the Hamilton Electric watch introduced in 1957 and the Bulova Accutron tuning fork watch in 1961 presaged increasing high technology competition.
In the late 1970s SSIH became insolvent due in part to a recession and in part to heavy competition from inexpensive Asian made quartz crystal watches. These difficulties occurred even though it had become Switzerland’s largest and the world’s third largest producer of watches. Its creditor banks assumed control in 1981.
ASUAG.
ASUAG, formed in 1931, was the world’s largest producer of watch movements and the parts thereof (balance wheels, balance springs (spiral), assortments, watch stones ("rubis"). ASUAG had also integrated an array of watch brands in 1972 into a sub holding company, General Watch Co.
ASUAG failed similarly in 1982.
Reorganisation.
Both groups were reorganised and merged into SSIH/ASUAG Holding Company in 1983. Taken private, in 1985, by then CEO Nicolas Hayek, with the understanding of the Swiss Banks and the financial assistance of a group of Swiss private investors (in particular Stephan Schmidheiny and Esther Grether), it was renamed SMH in 1986, and ultimately Swatch Group Ltd in 1998.
The launch of the new "Swatch" brand watch in 1983, by the then ETA SA CEO Ernst Thomke and his young team of engineers, was marked by bold new styling and design. The quartz watch was redesigned for manufacturing efficiency and fewer parts. This combination of marketing and manufacturing expertise restored Switzerland as a major player in the world wristwatch market.
Important Acquisitions.
Over the years, the Swatch Group has acquired several watchmaker companies such as Blancpain S. A. (founded 1735, bought by Swatch in 1992), Breguet S. A. (founded 1775, bought in 1999) and Glashütter Uhrenbetrieb GmbH (Germany, bought in 2000). All three brands are prominent members of its range of products today.
The most recent acquisition was HW Holding Inc., owner of Harry Winston, Inc. in New York, USA, a well-known jewelry and luxury watch company. The transaction closed on 26 March 2013 for 711 million Swiss Francs. Nayla Hayek became CEO. The company bought the world’s biggest flawless blue diamond, The Winston Blue, on May 15, 2014.
Brands.
"Prestige and Luxury Range"*
"High Range"*
"Middle Range"*
"Entry Range"*
"Private label"
Movement and Component Sales.
Swatch subsidiary ETA Manufacture Horlogere, which is based in Grenchen, Switzerland, furnishes many OEM brands, such as LVMH, which markets TAG Heuer, Hublot and Zenith watch lines, and Richemont, which markets amongst others, Baume & Mercier, IWC, Jaeger-LeCoultre, Officine Panerai, Piaget SA and Vacheron Constantin.
Electronic Systems.
The Swatch Group Electronic System provides solutions by integrating the individual expertise of the following companies not only for quartz wristwatches, but also "Sports and Events Timing" (see below) as well as high-tech "Ventures" such as "Belenos Clean Power AG".
Sports and Events Timing.
Swiss Timing under brands such as Omega and Longines provide Timing services for Sporting events such as Formula One, Olympic Games and Equestrian events.
The Nicolas G. Hayek Watchmaking School.
The Swatch Group started offering their first class for aspiring watchmakers in September 2005. This school is based out of Miami, Florida. Another school is located in Okmulgee, Oklahoma. Other watchmaker schools outside the US are situated in Glashütte (Germany), Pforzheim (Germany), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) and Shanghai (China).
Internet Time and New Technologies.
In 1998, Swatch invented "Swatch Internet Time", intended as a global time system, which divides the day into 1000 "beats" in a single worldwide time zone.
In October 2004, Swatch introduced its first smart watch, the Paparazzi, based on Microsoft Corporation's SPOT (Smart Personal Objects Technology.)
Ventures.
In 1994, Swatch entered into a joint venture with Germany's Daimler AG to produce the "Smart", but they later withdrew from this project.
Swatch subsidiary "Belenos Clean Power AG" entered into a joint venture with the Paul Scherrer Institut in May 2008 to develop a hydrogen fuel cell for a fuel cell powered car. Swatch began test drives of the car in Switzerland in 2012. However, the Swatch Group decided to abandon the project for a fuel cell powered car in June 2015 and concentrate instead on a new type of battery with high storage capacity.

</doc>
<doc id="82323" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82323" title="Västernorrland County">
Västernorrland County

Västernorrland County ("") is a county ("län") in the north of Sweden. It is bordered by the counties of Gävleborg, Jämtland, Västerbotten and the Gulf of Bothnia.
The name "Västernorrland" means "Western Norrland", as it was in the western part of the original Norrland (north Sweden and north Finland).
Province.
"For History, Geography and Culture, see: Ångermanland or Medelpad"
Västernorrland County covers approximately the historical provinces of Ångermanland (Angermannia) and Medelpad.
Administration.
The main aim of the county administrative board – a government agency headed by a governor – is to fulfil the goals set out in national politics by the Riksdag and the government, to coordinate the interests of the county, to promote the development of the county, to establish regional goals and safeguard the due process of law in the handling of each case. See List of Västernorrland governors.
Politics.
The county council of Västernorrland is the "".
History.
Västernorrland County was formed in 1634, when counties was introduced replacing the older provinces. Västernorrland then included parts of Sweden north of the city of Gävle, except Jämtland and Härjedalen – which belonged to Norway – and except Finland.
The county grew and shrank significantly since its creation. The boundary adjustments:
Even though the name "Västernorrland" literally means "Western Norrland", it is today situated on the eastern coast of Swedish Norrland. The "west" in its name ("") arose due to the fact that, at the time, Norrland was a much larger region, including northern Finland as well. Västernorrland was therefore in the western "arm" of Norrland in its broadest sense. 
Heraldry.
The arms for the County of Västernorrland are a combination of those of Ångermanland and Medelpad. When it is shown with a royal crown, it represents the county administrative board. Blazon: "Parted per pale, the arms of Angermannia and the arms of Medelpad."
Miscellaneous topics.
Local public transport in the county is provided by Din Tur.
<br>
Wanjin, a local resident, streams on Twitch.TV (Wanjin Stream) 

</doc>
<doc id="82327" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82327" title="The Primal Scream">
The Primal Scream

The Primal Scream. Primal Therapy: The Cure for Neurosis is a 1970 book by Arthur Janov, the inventor of Primal therapy. The book was popular and brought Janov fame and popular success.
Summary.
Janov describes the experiences he had with 63 patients during his first 18 months (starting in 1967) discovering and practicing Primal therapy. He claims a 100% cure rate.
Influence.
"The Primal Scream" has been described as "incredibly popular". Author Albert Goldman writes in "The Lives of John Lennon" (1988) that Janov sent pre-publication copies of "The Primal Scream" to celebrities such as John Lennon and Mick Jagger. Lennon underwent primal therapy with Janov after being mailed a copy of "The Primal Scream". Janov's book was read by tens of thousands of Americans and brought him fame and popular success. This inspired many therapists who had not met Janov to start offering imitation primal therapy, and led to the proliferation of programs offering happiness through radical personal transformation.

</doc>
<doc id="82328" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82328" title="Château de Blois">
Château de Blois

The Royal Château de Blois (French: "Château Royal de Blois") is located in the Loir-et-Cher "département" in the Loire Valley, in France, in the center of the city of Blois. The residence of several French kings, it is also the place where Joan of Arc went in 1429 to be blessed by the Archbishop of Reims before departing with her army to drive the English from Orléans.
Built in the middle of the town that it effectively controlled, the château of Blois comprises several buildings constructed from the 13th to the 17th century around the main courtyard.
It has 564 rooms and 75 staircases although only 23 were used frequently. There is a fireplace in each room. There are 100 bedrooms.
History.
Counts of Blois.
The "Salle des États Généraux", built in the beginning of the 13th century, is one of the oldest seignoral rooms preserved in France, and is also the largest remaining civilian Gothic room. The room was used as a court of justice by the Counts of Blois, and was used in 1576 and 1588 for the "États Généraux".
Louis XII.
The medieval castle was purchased in 1391 by Louis, duc d'Orléans, brother of Charles VI; after Louis' assassination, his widow, Valentina Visconti, retired to this castle at Blois. It was later inherited by their son, Charles d'Orléans the poet, who was taken prisoner at Agincourt and spent twenty-five years as a hostage in England, before returning to his beloved Blois, which he partly rebuilt as a more commodious dwelling. It became the favourite royal residence and the political capital of the kingdom under Charles' son, King Louis XII. At the beginning of the 16th century, the king initiated a reconstruction of the main block of the entry and the creation of an Italian garden in terraced parterres that occupied the present Place Victor Hugo and the site of the railway station. In 1890 the construction of the Avenue Victor Hugo destroyed the remainder of the gardens.
This wing, of red brick and grey stone, forms the main entrance to the château, and features a statue of the mounted king above the entrance. Although the style is principally Gothic, as the profiles of mouldings, the lobed arches and the pinnacles attest, there are elements of Renaissance architecture present, such as a small chandelier.
François I.
When Francis I took power in 1515, his wife Queen Claude had him refurbish Blois with the intention of moving to it from the Château d'Amboise. Francis initiated the construction of a new wing and created one of the period's most important libraries in the castle. But, after the death of his wife in 1524, he spent very little time at Blois and the massive library was moved to the royal Château de Fontainebleau where it was used to form the royal library that forms the core now of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France.
In this wing, the architecture and ornamentation are marked by Italian influence. At the centre is the monumental spiral staircase, covered with fine bas-relief sculptures and looking out onto the château's central court. Behind this wing is the façade of the Loges, characterised by a series of disconnected niches.
Henry III.
King Henry III, driven from Paris during the French Wars of Religion, lived at Blois and held the Estates-General convention there in 1576 and 1588. It was during this convention that the king had his arch-enemy, Henry I, Duke of Guise, assassinated by the king's bodyguard known as "the Forty-five", when the duke came to the Chateau for a meeting with Henry in December 1588. They also killed the Duke's brother Louis II, Cardinal of Guise the following day in the dungeons.
Henry IV.
After this, the castle was occupied by Henry IV, the first Bourbon monarch. On Henry's death in 1610, it became the place of exile for his widow, Marie de Medici, when she was expelled from the court of her son, Louis XIII.
Gaston d'Orléans.
In 1626, King Louis XIII gave the Château of Blois to his brother Gaston duc d'Orléans as a wedding gift. In 1635 there was another attempt to develop the castle but on Gaston's death in 1660, it was abandoned. The task of developing this wing was given to François Mansart, a well-known architect of the time. This wing makes up the rear wall of the court, directly opposite the Louis XII wing. The central section is composed of three horizontal layers where the superposition of Doric, Ionic and Corinthian orders can be seen.
By the time of the French Revolution the immense castle had been neglected for more than one hundred and thirty years. The content, many of its statues, royal emblems and coats of arms of the palace was removed. In a state of near total disrepair it was scheduled to be demolished but was given a reprieve as a military barracks.
Preservation as a monument.
In 1841, under the direction of King Louis-Philippe, the Château de Blois was classified as a historic monument. It was restored under the direction of the architect Felix Duban, to whom is due the painted decoration on walls and beamed ceilings. The château was turned into a museum. On view for visitors are the supposed poison cabinets of Catherine de' Medici. Most likely this room, the "chamber of secrets", had a much more banal purpose: exhibiting precious objects for guests.
Today, the château is owned by the town of Blois and is a tourist attraction.

</doc>
<doc id="82330" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82330" title="Electric generator">
Electric generator

In electricity generation, a generator is a device that converts mechanical energy to electrical energy for use in an external circuit. The source of mechanical energy may vary widely from a hand crank to an internal combustion engine. Generators provide nearly all of the power for electric power grids.
The reverse conversion of electrical energy into mechanical energy is done by an electric motor, and motors and generators have many similarities. Many motors can be mechanically driven to generate electricity and frequently make acceptable generators.
Terminology.
Electromagnetic generators fall into one of two broad categories, dynamos and alternators.
Mechanical:
Electrical:
History.
Before the connection between magnetism and electricity was discovered, electrostatic generators were used. They operated on electrostatic principles. Such generators generated very high voltage and low current. They operated by using moving electrically charged belts, plates, and disks that carried charge to a high potential electrode. The charge was generated using either of two mechanisms: Electrostatic induction and the triboelectric effect. Because of their inefficiency and the difficulty of insulating machines that produced very high voltages, electrostatic generators had low power ratings, and were never used for generation of commercially significant quantities of electric power, even at the time of its development.
Theoretical development.
The operating principle of electromagnetic generators was discovered in the years of 1831–1832 by Michael Faraday. The principle, later called Faraday's law, is that an electromotive force is generated in an electrical conductor which encircles a varying magnetic flux.
He also built the first electromagnetic generator, called the Faraday disk, a type of homopolar generator, using a copper disc rotating between the poles of a horseshoe magnet. It produced a small DC voltage.
This design was inefficient, due to self-cancelling counterflows of current in regions that were not under the influence of the magnetic field. While current was induced directly underneath the magnet, the current would circulate backwards in regions that were outside the influence of the magnetic field. This counterflow limited the power output to the pickup wires, and induced waste heating of the copper disc. Later homopolar generators would solve this problem by using an array of magnets arranged around the disc perimeter to maintain a steady field effect in one current-flow direction.
Another disadvantage was that the output voltage was very low, due to the single current path through the magnetic flux. Experimenters found that using multiple turns of wire in a coil could produce higher, more useful voltages. Since the output voltage is proportional to the number of turns, generators could be easily designed to produce any desired voltage by varying the number of turns. Wire windings became a basic feature of all subsequent generator designs.
Independently of Faraday, the Hungarian Anyos Jedlik started experimenting in 1827 with the electromagnetic rotating devices which he called electromagnetic self-rotors. In the prototype of the single-pole electric starter (finished between 1852 and 1854) both the stationary and the revolving parts were electromagnetic. He also may have formulated the concept of the dynamo in 1861 (before Siemens and Wheatstone) but didn't patent it as he thought he wasn't the first to realize this.
Direct current generators.
The dynamo was the first electrical generator capable of delivering power for industry. The dynamo uses electromagnetic induction to convert mechanical rotation into direct current through the use of a commutator. An early dynamo was built by Hippolyte Pixii in 1832.
The Woolrich Electrical Generator of 1844, now in Thinktank, Birmingham Science Museum, is the earliest electrical generator used in an industrial process. It was used by the firm of Elkingtons for commercial electroplating.
The modern dynamo, fit for use in industrial applications, was invented independently by Sir Charles Wheatstone, Werner von Siemens and Samuel Alfred Varley. Varley took out a patent on 24 December 1866, while Siemens and Wheatstone both announced their discoveries on 17 January 1867, the latter delivering a paper on his discovery to the Royal Society.
The "dynamo-electric machine" employed self-powering electromagnetic field coils rather than permanent magnets to create the stator field. Wheatstone's design was similar to Siemens', with the difference that in the Siemens design the stator electromagnets were in series with the rotor, but in Wheatstone's design they were in parallel. The use of electromagnets rather than permanent magnets greatly increased the power output of a dynamo and enabled high power generation for the first time. This invention led directly to the first major industrial uses of electricity. For example, in the 1870s Siemens used electromagnetic dynamos to power electric arc furnaces for the production of metals and other materials.
The dynamo machine that was developed consisted of a stationary structure, which provides the magnetic field, and a set of rotating windings which turn within that field. On larger machines the constant magnetic field is provided by one or more electromagnets, which are usually called field coils.
Large power generation dynamos are now rarely seen due to the now nearly universal use of alternating current for power distribution. Before the adoption of AC, very large direct-current dynamos were the only means of power generation and distribution. AC has come to dominate due to the ability of AC to be easily transformed to and from very high voltages to permit low losses over large distances.
Alternating current generators.
Through a series of discoveries, the dynamo was succeeded by many later inventions, especially the AC alternator, which was capable of generating alternating current.
Alternating current generating systems were known in simple forms from Michael Faraday's original discovery of the magnetic induction of electric current. Faraday himself built an early alternator. His machine was a "rotating rectangle", whose operation was "heteropolar" - each active conductor passed successively through regions where the magnetic field was in opposite directions.
Large two-phase alternating current generators were built by a British electrician, J.E.H. Gordon, in 1882. The first public demonstration of an "alternator system" was given by William Stanley, Jr., an employee of Westinghouse Electric in 1886.
Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti established "Ferranti, Thompson and Ince" in 1882, to market his "Ferranti-Thompson Alternator", invented with the help of renowned physicist Lord Kelvin. His early alternators produced frequencies between 100 and 300 Hz. Ferranti went on to design the Deptford Power Station for the London Electric Supply Corporation in 1887 using an alternating current system. On its completion in 1891, it was the first truly modern power station, supplying high-voltage AC power that was then "stepped down" for consumer use on each street. This basic system remains in use today around the world.
After 1891, polyphase alternators were introduced to supply currents of multiple differing phases. Later alternators were designed for varying alternating-current frequencies between sixteen and about one hundred hertz, for use with arc lighting, incandescent lighting and electric motors.
Self-excitation.
As the requirements for larger scale power generation increased, a new limitation rose: the magnetic fields available from permanent magnets. Diverting a small amount of the power generated by the generator to an electromagnetic field coil allowed the generator to produce substantially more power. This concept was dubbed self-excitation.
The field coils are connected in series or parallel with the armature winding. When the generator first starts to turn, the small amount of remanent magnetism present in the iron core provides a magnetic field to get it started, generating a small current in the armature. This flows through the field coils, creating a larger magnetic field which generates a larger armature current. This "bootstrap" process continues until the magnetic field in the core levels off due to saturation and the generator reaches a steady state power output.
Very large power station generators often utilize a separate smaller generator to excite the field coils of the larger. In the event of a severe widespread power outage where islanding of power stations has occurred, the stations may need to perform a black start to excite the fields of their largest generators, in order to restore customer power service.
Specialized types of generator.
Direct current.
Homopolar generator.
A homopolar generator is a DC electrical generator comprising an electrically conductive disc or cylinder rotating in a plane perpendicular to a uniform static magnetic field. A potential difference is created between the center of the disc and the rim (or ends of the cylinder), the electrical polarity depending on the direction of rotation and the orientation of the field.
It is also known as a unipolar generator, acyclic generator, disk dynamo, or Faraday disc. The voltage is typically low, on the order of a few volts in the case of small demonstration models, but large research generators can produce hundreds of volts, and some systems have multiple generators in series to produce an even larger voltage. They are unusual in that they can produce tremendous electric current, some more than a million amperes, because the homopolar generator can be made to have very low internal resistance.
MHD generator.
A magnetohydrodynamic generator directly extracts electric power from moving hot gases through a magnetic field, without the use of rotating electromagnetic machinery. MHD generators were originally developed because the output of a plasma MHD generator is a flame, well able to heat the boilers of a steam power plant. The first practical design was the AVCO Mk. 25, developed in 1965. The U.S. government funded substantial development, culminating in a 25 MW demonstration plant in 1987. In the Soviet Union from 1972 until the late 1980s, the MHD plant U 25 was in regular commercial operation on the Moscow power system with a rating of 25 MW, the largest MHD plant rating in the world at that time. MHD generators operated as a topping cycle are currently (2007) less efficient than combined cycle gas turbines.
Alternating current.
Induction generator.
Some AC motors may be used as generators, turning mechanical energy into electric current. Induction generators operate by mechanically turning their rotor faster than the synchronous speed, giving negative slip. A regular AC asynchronous motor usually can be used as a generator, without any internal modifications. Induction generators are useful in applications such as minihydro power plants, wind turbines, or in reducing high-pressure gas streams to lower pressure, because they can recover energy with relatively simple controls.
To operate, an induction generator must be excited with a leading voltage; this is usually done by connection to an electrical grid, or sometimes they are self-excited by using phase correcting capacitors.
Linear electric generator.
In the simplest form of linear electric generator, a sliding magnet moves back and forth through a solenoid - a spool of copper wire. An alternating current is induced in the loops of wire by Faraday's law of induction each time the magnet slides through. This type of generator is used in the Faraday flashlight. Larger linear electricity generators are used in wave power schemes.
Variable speed constant frequency generators.
Many renewable energy efforts attempt to harvest natural sources of mechanical energy (wind, tides, etc.) to produce electricity. Because these sources fluctuate in power applied, standard generators using permanent magnets and fixed windings would deliver unregulated voltage and frequency. The overhead of regulation (whether before the generator via gear reduction or after generation by electrical means) is high in proportion to the naturally-derived energy available.
New generator designs such as the asynchronous or induction singly-fed generator, the doubly fed generator, or the brushless wound-rotor doubly fed generator are seeing success in variable speed constant frequency applications, such as wind turbines or other renewable energy technologies. These systems thus offer cost, reliability and efficiency benefits in certain use cases.
Common use cases.
Vehicular generators.
Roadway vehicles.
Motor vehicles require electrical energy to power their instrumentation, keep the engine itself operating, and recharge their batteries. Until about the 1960s motor vehicles tended to use DC generators with electromechanical regulators. Following the historical trend above and for many of the same reasons, these have now been replaced by alternators with built-in rectifier circuits.
Bicycles.
Bicycles require energy to power running lights and other equipment. There are two common kinds of generator in use on bicycles: bottle dynamos which engage the bicycle's tire on an as-needed basis, and hub dynamos which are directly attached to the bicycle's drive train. In reality, neither of these is a dynamo, properly speaking - they are small permanent-magnet alternators.
Sailboats.
Sailing boats may use a water- or wind-powered generator to trickle-charge the batteries. A small propeller, wind turbine or impeller is connected to a low-power generator to supply currents at typical wind or cruising speeds.
Genset.
An "engine-generator" is the combination of an electrical generator and an engine (prime mover) mounted together to form a single piece of self-contained equipment. The engines used are usually piston engines, but gas turbines can also be used. And there are even hybrid diesel-gas units, called dual-fuel units. Many different versions of engine-generators are available - ranging from very small portable petrol powered sets to large turbine installations. The primary advantage of engine-generators is the ability to independently supply electricity, allowing the units to serve as backup power solutions.
Human powered electrical generators.
A generator can also be driven by human muscle power (for instance, in field radio station equipment).
Human powered direct current generators are commercially available, and have been the project of some DIY enthusiasts. Typically operated by means of pedal power, a converted bicycle trainer, or a foot pump, such generators can be practically used to charge batteries, and in some cases are designed with an integral inverter. An average "healthy human" can produce a steady 75 Watts (0.1 horsepower) for a full eight hour period, while a "first class athlete" can produce approximately 298 Watts (0.4 horsepower) for a similar period. At the end of which an undetermined period of rest and recovery will be required. At 298 Watts the average "healthy human" becomes exhausted within 10 minutes. It is important to note that the power figures referenced above are for direct human output and not the electrical power that can be generated from it. Portable radio receivers with a crank are made to reduce battery purchase requirements, see clockwork radio. During the mid 20th century, pedal powered radios were used throughout the Australian outback, to provide schooling (School of the Air), medical and other needs in remote stations and towns.
Mechanical measurement.
Designed to measure shaft speed, a tachogenerator is a device which produces an output voltage proportional to that speed. Tachogenerators are frequently used to power tachometers to measure the speeds of electric motors, engines, and the equipment they power. speed. With precise construction and design, generators can be built to produce very precise voltages for certain ranges of shaft speeds.
Equivalent circuit.
An equivalent circuit of a generator and load is shown in the diagram to the right. The generator is represented by an abstract generator consisting of an ideal voltage source and an internal resistance. The generator's formula_1 and formula_2 parameters can be determined by measuring the winding resistance (corrected to operating temperature), and measuring the open-circuit and loaded voltage for a defined current load.
This is the simplest model of a generator, further elements may need to be added for an accurate representation. In particular, inductance can be added to allow for the machine's windings and magnetic leakage flux, but a full representation can become much more complex than this.

</doc>
<doc id="82333" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82333" title="Oak Island">
Oak Island

Oak Island is a privately owned island in Lunenburg County on the south shore of Nova Scotia, Canada. The tree-covered island is one of about 360 small islands in Mahone Bay and rises to a maximum of above sea level. The island is located from shore and connected to the mainland by a causeway and gate.
The island is best known for various theories about possible buried treasure or historical artifacts, and the associated exploration.
Oak Island.
The nearest large community is the village of Chester. The earliest European residents of the area were French fisherman who, by the 1750s, had built a few houses on the future site of Chester. During the French and Indian War, the British government of Nova Scotia enacted a series of measures to encourage settlement of the area by the European-descended New Englanders. Land was made available to settlers in 1759 through the Shorham grant. Chester was officially founded that same year.
A large part of Oak Island was granted to the Monro, Lynch, Seacombe and Young families around the same time as the establishment of Chester. The first major group of settlers arrived in the Chester area from Massachusetts in 1761. The following year, Oak island was officially surveyed and divided into 32, 4-acre lots. In the early days of British settlement, the Island was known locally as "Smith's Island," after an early settler of the area named Edward Smith. Cartographer J.F.K. DesBarres renamed the Island to "Gloucester Isle" in 1778. Shortly thereafter, the locally used name "Oak Island" was officially adopted for the Island. Early residents included Edward Smith in the 1760s and Anthony Vaughn Sr. in the early 1770s. In 1784, the government made additional land grants, this time to former soldiers, which included parts of Oak Island.
Presently, Oak Island Tours owns 78% of the island. The remaining 22% of the island is owned by private parties. There are two permanent homes and two cottages occupied part-time on the island.
The Oak Island mystery.
For more than a century and a half, there have been investigations and excavations on Oak Island. There are a large number of theories about what might be buried or concealed on the Island. Areas of interest on the island include a location known as the "Money Pit", a formation of boulders called "Nolan's Cross", the beach at "Smith's Cove", and a triangle-shaped "Swamp". The Money pit area has been repeatedly excavated. Critics argue that there is no treasure and that the Money Pit is a natural phenomenon.
Money Pit history.
Early accounts and the Money Pit.
There are many 19th-century accounts of Oak Island, but some are conflicting or biased. Further, physical evidence from the initial excavations is unavailable. A basic summary of the history of the pit is as follows:
In 1857, there appeared newspaper accounts of a group digging for the treasure of the pirate Captain Kidd on Oak Island. In 1862, treasure hunter J.B. McCully of Truro, Nova Scotia wrote that the early settlers of the Oak Island area had brought with them a story of a dying sailor of Captain Kidd's crew claiming that 2 million pounds value in treasure had been buried on an island. McCully further claimed that in the early days of settlement, a "Mr. McGinnis" while scouting a location for a farm had happened upon a depression in the earth which was consistent with the "Captain Kidd" story. With the assistance of a "Smith" and "Vaughn", McCully claimed that McGinnis excavated the depression and discovered a layer of flagstones two feet below. As they dug down they discovered layers of logs at about every . They were said to have abandoned the excavation at due to the people of the area refusing to assist in the digging based on "superstitious dread". In 1863, an investor in the Oak Island diggings named Paul Phy claimed that "McGinnis" was the first settler on Oak Island and had discovered the "depression" around 1799.
Investigator Joe Nickell reviewed the original accounts and interviews with McGinnis descendants and other descendants of the original Oak Island land owners. While later sources asserted that the treasure had been discovered by three young boys, he asserted that the story was of three adult lot owners who discovered the depression on the island and began digging.
This excavations were first briefly mentioned in print in the "Liverpool Transcript" in October 1856. A more complete account followed, again in the "Liverpool Transcript", by a Justice of the Peace in Chester, Nova Scotia, the "Novascotian", "British Colonist", and "A History Of Lunenburg County" (the last source based on the "Liverpool Transcript" articles).
Onslow Company and the 90 Foot Stone.
Approximately eight years after the McGinnis dig, according to articles written in the 1850s, another company examined what was to become known as the Money Pit. The Onslow Company sailed from central Nova Scotia near Truro to Oak Island with the goal of recovering what they believed to be secret treasure. They continued the excavation down to approximately and found layers of logs or "marks" about every ten feet (3 m) and layers of charcoal, putty and coconut fibre at 40, 50 and 60 feet (12, 15 and 18 m).
According to the earliest account written in 1862, at , they recovered a large stone bearing an inscription of symbols. The pit subsequently flooded up to the level. Bailing did not reduce the water level, and the excavation was abandoned. Several researchers apparently attempted to decipher the symbols. One translated them as saying "Forty feet below, two million pounds lie buried." The symbols currently associated with the "Forty feet below..." translation and seen in many books first appeared in "True Tales of Buried Treasure", written by explorer and historian Edward Rowe Snow in 1951. In this book he states he was given this set of symbols by Reverend A.T. Kempton of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Truro Company and finding metal pieces.
In 1849, investors formed the Truro Company, which reexcavated the shaft back down to the level, where it flooded again. They then drilled into the ground below the bottom of the shaft. According to the nineteenth-century account, the drill or "pod auger" passed through a spruce platform at , a head space, of what was described as "metal in pieces", of oak, another of metal, of oak, another spruce layer, and finally into clay for without striking anything else.
Oak Island Association and Old Gold Salvage group.
The next excavation attempt, made in 1861 by a new company called the Oak Island Association, resulted in the collapse of the bottom of the shaft into either a natural cavern or booby trap underneath. It was later theorized that the imagined chests had fallen into a deep void and that the pit may have been booby-trapped to protect the treasure. The first fatality during excavations occurred when the boiler of a pumping engine burst. (Six people were killed in accidents during various excavations.) The company gave up when their funds were exhausted in 1864.
Further excavations were made in 1866, 1893, 1909, 1931, 1935, 1936, and 1959, none of which were successful. Excavators did, however, pour red paint into the flooded pit that revealed three separate exit holes around the island. Another fatality occurred on 26 March 1897 when Maynard Kaiser, a worker, fell to his death. Franklin Roosevelt was part of the Old Gold Salvage group of 1909 and kept up with news and developments for most of his life.
Gilbert Hedden and William Chappell.
In 1928, a New York newspaper printed a feature story about the strange history of the island. Gilbert Hedden of New Jersey, operator of a steel fabricating concern, saw the article and was fascinated by the engineering problems involved in recovering the putative treasure. Hedden collected books and articles on the island and made six trips there. He even ventured to England to converse with Harold T. Wilkins, the author of "Captain Kidd and His Skeleton Island", believing he had found a link between Oak Island and a map in Wilkins's book.
Hedden purchased the southeast end of the island. He began digging in the summer of 1935, following excavations by William Chappell in 1931. In 1939, he even informed King George VI about developments on Oak Island.
The 1931 excavations by William Chappell sank a shaft 12 × 14 feet to the southwest of what he believed was the site of the 1897 shaft, close to the original pit. At , a number of artifacts, including an axe, an anchor fluke, and a pick, were found. The pick has been identified as a Cornish miner's poll pick. By this time, the entire area around the Money Pit was littered with the debris and refuse of numerous prior excavation attempts, so the owner of the pick cannot be identified.
Restall family and Robert Dunfield.
Excavation by the Restall family in the early 1960s ended tragically when four men died after being overcome by fumes in a shaft near the beach. In 1965, Robert Dunfield leased the island and, using a 70-ton digging crane with a clam bucket, dug out the pit area to a depth of and width of . The soil removed was carefully inspected for artifacts. Transportation of the crane to the island required the construction of a causeway (which still exists) from the western end of the island to Crandall's Point on the mainland two hundred metres away.
Triton Alliance.
Around 1967, Daniel C. Blankenship and David Tobias formed Triton Alliance, Ltd. and purchased most of the island. In 1971, Triton workers excavated a 235-foot shaft, known as Borehole 10-X, supported by a steel caisson to bedrock. According to Blankenship and Tobias, cameras lowered down the shaft into a cave below recorded the possible presence of some chests, human remains, wooden cribbing and tools; however, the images were unclear, and none of these claims has been independently confirmed. The shaft subsequently collapsed, and the excavation was again abandoned. This shaft was later successfully redug to , reaching bedrock; work was halted because of lack of funds and the collapse of the partnership.
An account of an excavation of the Money Pit appeared in the January 1965 issue of "Reader's Digest" magazine. More than a decade later, the Money Pit mystery was the subject of an episode of the television series "In Search of..." that first aired 18 January 1979, bringing the legend of Oak Island to a wider audience.
During the 1990s, further exploration was stalled because of legal battles between the Triton partners. , a portion of the island was for sale for an estimated US$7 million. A group called the Oak Island Tourism Society had hoped the Government of Canada would purchase the island, but a group of American businessmen in the drilling industry did so instead.
Oak Island Tours, Inc..
It was announced in April 2006 that brothers Rick and Marty Lagina from Michigan had purchased a 50% stake in Oak Island Tours Inc. for an undisclosed amount of money. The shares sold to the Michigan partners were previously owned by David Tobias; remaining shares are owned by Blankenship. Center Road Developments, in conjunction with Allan Kostrzewa and Brian Urbach, members of the Michigan group, had purchased Lot 25 from David Tobias for a reported $230,000 one year before Tobias sold the rest of his share. The Michigan group, working with Blankenship, said it would resume operations on Oak Island in the hope of discovering buried treasure and solving the mystery of Oak Island.
In July 2010, Blankenship and the other stakeholders in Oak Island Tours Inc. announced on their website that the Nova Scotia Department of Natural Resources and Department of Tourism, Culture and Heritage had granted them a temporary Treasure Trove Licence allowing them to resume activities until 31 December 2010. After December 2010, the department repealed the former Treasure Trove Act and replaced it with a new "Oak Island Treasure Act". The new Oak Island Treasure Act came into effect on 1 January 2011 and allows for treasure hunting to continue on the island under the terms of a licence issued by the Minister of Natural Resources.
Money Pit oak platforms.
While later accounts say that oak platforms were discovered every , but the earliest accounts simply say that "marks" of some type were found at these places. They also say there were "tool marks" or pick scrapes on the walls of the money pit and that the dirt was noticeably loose and not as hard packed as the surrounding soil.
Money Pit flood system.
In 1851, treasure hunters discovered coconut fibers beneath the surface of one beach called Smith's Cove. This led to the theory that the beach had been converted into a giant siphon, feeding water from the ocean into the pit via a manmade tunnel. A sample of this material is said to have been sent to the Smithsonian Institution in the early 20th century, where it was concluded that the material was coconut fibre. The origin of these fibres has been a source of heated debate among Oak Island researchers, since coconut trees do not occur naturally in Canada.
One expedition said they found the flood tunnel at , and that it was lined with flat stones. However, Robert Dunfield (a trained geologist) wrote that he carefully examined the walls of the reexcavated pit and was unable to locate any evidence of this tunnel.
Upon the invitation of Boston-area businessman David Mugar, a two-week survey was conducted by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in 1995. This is the only known scientific study that has been conducted on the site. After running dye tests in the bore hole, they concluded that the flooding was caused by a natural interaction between the island's freshwater lens and tidal pressures in the underlying geology, refuting the idea of artificially constructed flood tunnels. The Woods Hole scientists who viewed the videos taken in 1971 reported that nothing conclusive could be determined from the murky images.
The five finger drains or box drains at Smith's Cove on Oak Island, which have traditionally been assumed to feed seawater into the alleged flood tunnel, have in recent times been argued to be the remains of an early salt works, and accordingly there is no connection between the five finger drains and any flooding of the Pit.
Oak Island lies on a glacial tumulus system and is underlaid by a series of water-filled anhydrite cavities, which may be responsible for the repeated flooding of the pit. This type of limestone easily dissolves when exposed to water, forming caves and natural voids. Bedrock lies at a depth of in the Money Pit area.
Deciphering the 90 foot stone.
The Oak Island 90 Foot Stone was cut with "mysterious markings" that no one could read or decipher. The first public announcement of the Oak Island 90 Foot Stone and its symbols was in the Halifax Sun and Advisor dated 2 July 1862, which mentioned a letter retelling the facts of the stone. The author was J.B. McCully, who had drafted the letter on 2 June 1862. While offering a secondhand description of the conditions of discovery during the 1805 excavation, McCully mentions the following: “Some were charcoal, some putty, and one at 80 feet was a stone cut square, two feet long and about a foot thick, with several characters cut on it”.
In a newspaper article from 1863, the stone is said to have been built into the "chimney of an old house near the pit". Another article from a year later claimed that the stone had been preserved by the Smith Family. On January 2 of 1864, John Hunter-Duvar, secretary of the Historical Society of Nova Scotia, contacted treasure hunter George Cooke. In a letter dated 27 January 1864 from George Cooke to John Hunter-Duvar replying to the letter of 2 January 1864, Cooke claims that Smith had built the stone into his chimney in 1824 and says that he was shown the stone by Smith in the chimney around 1850. Cooke further said that when he visited the house in 1864, he discovered that the chimney had been enclosed in wood and surrounded by a staircase making the stone no longer visible.
The next mention of the stone is in the Oak Island Treasure Company Prospectus of 1893. The prospectus claims that at some unknown point between 1864 and 1893, the stone was taken out of the chimney and moved to Halifax where an unnamed expert was said to have deciphered the stone as reading: “Ten feet below are two million pounds buried.” An undated post-1893 letter by William Blair states the following: “Jefferson W. McDonald, who first mentioned Oak Island to me in 1893, worked under George Mitchell. Mr. McDonald, who was a carpenter by trade, also told of taking down a partition in Smith’s house, in order that he with others might examine the characters cut on the stone used in the fireplace in the house. The characters were there all right, but no person present could decipher them.” George Mitchell was the superintendent of works for the Oak Island Association, formed 3 April 1861 and ceasing operation by 29 March 1865.
James DeMille, in his 1872 fiction novel "The Treasures of the Sea", details how he was a summer resident of Chester Basin during the later 1860s. He lived on Oak Island for a summer and possessed firsthand knowledge of the underground workings through his own observations. DeMille noted the stone had already been removed from the fireplace when he arrived on the island and that up until that point no person had been able to decode the mysterious symbols found upon the stone.
The Oak Island Syndicate was based on the original Truro Syndicate enlisted the help in securing funding for the treasure hunt through silent partner Warren Delano, Jr., who was an accomplished mariner, trader, business organizer, and grandfather to Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Reginald Vanderbilt Harris (1881-1986) wrote in his 1958 book “The Oak Island Mystery” It was said, “About 1865-1866 the stone was removed and taken to Halifax. Among those who worked to remove the stone was Jefferson W. MacDonald.”. While the letter of William Blair supports the idea that the MacDonald helped remove the stone, Harris provides no source for the claim that the stone was removed in 1865 or 1866.
On August 19, 1911, Collier’s Magazine published a firsthand account by Captain H.L. Bowdoin of the stone which was at that time located at Creighton’s bookbindery in Halifax. He described the rock as being "of a basalt type hard and fine-grained.” The stone Bowdoin saw had no symbols on it. He was told that they had worn off, but was doubtful given the hardness of the stone that it would have been possible for such an inscription to wear off no matter how the stone might have been used in the bookbindery.
The book "The Oak Island Treasure" by Charles B. Driscoll states this: "The stone was shown to everyone who visited the Island in those days. Smith built this stone into his fireplace, with the strange characters outermost, so that visitors might see and admire it. Many years after his death, the stone was removed from the fireplace and taken to Halifax, where the local savants were unable to translate the inscription. It was then taken to the home of J.B. McCulley in Truro, where it was exhibited to hundreds of friends of the McCulleys who became interested in a later treasure company. Somehow the stone fell into the hands of a bookbinder, which used it as a base upon which to beat leather for many years. A generation later, with the inscription nearly worn away, the stone found its way to a bookstore in Halifax, and what happened to it after that I was unable to learn. But there are plenty of people living who have seen the stone. Nobody, however, ever seriously pretended to translate the inscription." The stone was supposedly brought by A.O. Creighton of the 1866 expedition from the Smith home to Creighton's bookbindery in Halifax. Harry W. Marshall, the son of one of the owners of the bookbindery, wrote in 1935 that he had seen the stone at the business until it closed in 1919. He believed that the stone was left behind in the building at that time.
Original lot owners.
The names of the original lot owners and their plots were mapped out for Nova Scotia and the Nova Scotia Crown Lands office on July 6, 1818, by William Nelson and David W. Crandall.
Notable explorers.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, stirred by family stories originating from his famous sailing and trading grandfather and Oak Island financier Warren Delano, Jr., began following the Oak Island Mystery from late 1909 to early 1910 and continued to follow and keep close tabs on progress until his death in 1945. Throughout his political years, he monitored Oak Island and kept close ties to recovery attempts and development. He privately devised a secret plan to visit Oak Island as President in 1939 while being in nearby Halifax, Nova Scotia. However, the fog delay and the international situation leading up to World War II made it impossible, as is seen in an archived signed letter.
Australian-American actor Errol Flynn was invested in an Oak Island treasure dig.
Actor John Wayne was an investor in the drilling equipment manufacture used on Oak Island and offered the use of his equipment to help solve the mystery.
William Vincent Astor, member of the prominent Astor family and heir to the fortune after his father died on the "Titanic", took a passive investment in digging for Oak Island Treasure.
Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd, Jr. maintained a passive investment in, and monitored the status over time of, Oak Island exploration and treasure hunting. Admiral Byrd advised Franklin Roosevelt on Oak Island and formed a relationship over their work, forming the United States Antarctic Service (USAS), an arm of the federal government, with Byrd nominally in command.
Theories.
There has been wide-ranging speculation among enthusiasts as to how the pit was formed and what it might contain.
Natural sinkhole.
Critic Joe Nickell argues that there is no treasure and that the apparent pit is a natural phenomenon, likely a sinkhole connected to limestone passages or caverns. Suggestions that the pit is a natural phenomenon, specifically accumulated debris in a sinkhole or geological fault, date to at least 1911. There are numerous sinkholes on the mainland near the island, together with underground caves (to which the alleged booby traps are attributed).
The resemblance to a human-made pit has been suggested to be partly due to the texture of natural accumulated debris in sinkholes: "this filling would be softer than the surrounding ground, and give the impression that it had been dug up before". The appearance of "platforms" of rotten logs has been attributed to trees damaged by "blowdowns" (derechos) or wildfires, periodically falling or washing into the hollow.
Another pit similar to the early description of the Money Pit was discovered in the area in 1949, when workmen were digging a well on the shore of Mahone Bay. At a point where the earth was soft, they found a pit, described as follows: "At about two feet down a layer of fieldstone was struck. Then logs of spruce and oak were unearthed at irregular intervals, and some of the wood was charred. The immediate suspicion was that another Money Pit had been found."
Naval stores and tar kiln.
Joy Steele suggests that the Money Pit is actually a tar kiln that dates from the historical period when "Oak Island served as a tar-making location as part of the British naval stores industry".
Pirate treasure.
Another explanation is that the pit holds a pirate treasure hoard buried by Captain Kidd or possibly Edward Teach (Blackbeard), who claimed he buried his treasure "where none but Satan and myself can find it." Some believe that Kidd conspired with Henry Every and Oak Island was used as a pseudo community bank between the two. Folklore has it that a man on his deathbed in the early 18th century confessed to having been a member of Kidd's crew, and stated that they had buried several chests of treasure on an island "east of Boston".
Spanish naval treasure.
One explanation proposes the pit was dug to hold treasure, but that this was done by someone other than pirates, such as Spanish sailors from a wrecked galleon or British troops during the American Revolution. A recent theory proposes that the pit was constructed by British marines to store the loot acquired from the British invasion of Cuba, which at the time was valued at about 1,000,000 pounds (about $180,000,000 in 2015). The author John Godwin argued that, given the apparent size and complexity of the pit, it was likely dug by French army engineers hoping to hide the contents of the treasury of the Fortress of Louisbourg after it fell to the British during the Seven Years' War.
Marie Antoinette's jewels.
There is a story that, like most others regarding the island, lacks archival sources, or any quoted sources at all, which places the jewels of Marie Antoinette (which are historically missing, save for some specimens in the collections of museums worldwide) on Oak Island. On 5 October 1789 during the French Revolution, an angry mob of Parisian working women was incited by revolutionaries and marched on the Palace of Versailles, where the royal family lived. According to the story, Marie Antoinette instructed her maid or a lady-in-waiting to take the jewels and flee. Supposedly, this maid fled to London with the jewels and perhaps other treasures, such as important artwork or documents, secreted away either on her person (one variation suggests sewn into her underskirts in the case of the jewels, though fails to mention artwork) or as her luggage; it is even said she was perhaps assisted by the remaining officers of the French navy during the uprising at the queen's behest.
The story then goes on to say that this woman fled further afield from London to Nova Scotia. Through the royal connections she would have had during her service to the queen at Versailles, she managed to contract the French navy to help construct the famed 'pit' on the island. This theory (as noted) lacks recognized documentation other than that which is folkloric in nature, involves the French navy, which (during the Revolution) had an uncertain level of authority, and would place the construction of the Oak Island structure very close to its alleged initial discovery by Daniel McGinnis in 1795. Whether such a complex engineering effort could have been completed in that small period of time is questionable, though no official date of its construction exists.
Shakespeare manuscripts.
Still others have speculated that the Oak Island pit was dug to hold treasure much more exotic than gold or silver. In his 1953 book, "The Oak Island Enigma: A History and Inquiry Into the Origin of the Money Pit", Penn Leary contended that the pit was used to hide manuscripts showing Francis Bacon to be the author of William Shakespeare's works and a leader of the Rosicrucians. Leary's "The Second Cryptographic Shakespeare", published in 1990, identified ciphers in Shakespeare's plays and poems pointing to Bacon's authorship. Author and researcher Mark Finnan elaborated upon Leary's Oak Island theory. The theory was also used in the Norwegian book "Organisten" ("The Organ Player") by Erlend Loe and Petter Amundsen.
Rosicrucian vault.
Some have speculated that the Rosicrucian secret society and its supposed leader Sir Francis Bacon organized a secret project on Oak Island as the home of its legendary vault with ingenious means to conceal ancient manuscripts and artifacts. Researchers and cryptographers such as Petter Amundsen and Daniel Ronnstam claim to have found codes hidden in Shakespeare, rock formations on the island, and clues hidden in other 16th and 17th century art and historical documents. Daniel Ronnstam claims the 90 foot stone is in fact a dual cypher created by the master cryptologist, Sir Francis Bacon.
Knights Templar treasure.
It has been asserted that the pit could have been dug by exiled Knights Templar and that it might be the last resting place of the Holy Grail or possibly the Ark of the Covenant.
Freemasonry artifacts.
Mark Finnan in his book "Oak Island Secrets" noted that many Masonic markings were found on Oak Island and pointed out that the shaft or pit and its mysterious contents seemed to replicate aspects of a Masonic initiation rite involving a hidden vault containing a sacred treasure. Joe Nickell identifies parallels between the accounts of Oak Island and the allegory of the "Secret Vault" in York Rite Freemasonry, similar to the Chase Vault, identifies many prominent excavators as Freemasons, and suggests that the accounts explicitly include Masonic imagery.
The most thorough and comprehensive treatment to date of the masonic aspects of the Oak Island Legend is given by Freemason Dennis King in his article "The Oak Island Legend: The Masonic Angle".
Ark of the Covenant.
Some suggest what lies concealed in Oak Island can be more than 1,500 years old. Researcher and author J. Hutton Pulitzer's theory involves ancient mariner voyages of Minoan, Phoenician, Carthaginian and later Roman Empire origins visiting Oak Island because of its strategic navigational location. Pulitzer writes in his books that ancient mariners kept the New World a trade secret and were hired by the kings, pharaohs, and emperors of ancient Europe to collect valuable resources, such as gold, tobacco, and other exotic items. On the television series "The Curse of Oak Island", he postulates the theory that one such secret voyage involved treasure and religious artifacts from King Solomon's temple or the Ark of the Covenant, being relocated and deposited on Oak Island for safekeeping.
Viking ship.
Another explanation is that the Money Pit is actually a sunken Viking ship which has settled in a vertical position, making it a treasure only in the historical or archeological sense. Sukhwant Singh theorizes the regularly separated platforms are actually wooden backrests for rowers, and the coconut fibers are the remains of mattresses, pillows, or other cushions used by the Vikings for comfort.
Coptic settlers.
Barry Fell attempted to have the symbols on the stone translated in the late 1970s. Mark Finnan Fell concluded that the symbols were similar to the Coptic alphabet and when translated reads as follows: "To escape contagion of plague and winter hardships, he is to pray for an end or mitigation the Arif: The people will perish in misery if they forget the Lord, alas." Fell proposed a theory where Coptic migrants sailed from North Africa to Oak Island and constructed the pit.
Underground structures.
Lee Lamb claimed that human-made structures exist under Oak Island. She was unable to conclude if these structures were constructed by people hiding a treasure or were the remains of prior excavation attempts.
In popular culture.
Books.
Oak Island has been a staple of treasure literature with the first published account appearing in 1863 and new books appearing on regular basis. More than fifty books have been published recounting the island's history and exploring competing theories. Several works of fiction have been based upon the Money Pit, including "The Money Pit Mystery", "Riptide", and "The Hand of Robin Squires".
Music.
In 1973, local singer-songwriter Allister MacGillivray mentioned the island in "Song for the Mira", a renowned folk song about the Mira River. The lyrics include a reference to "Oak Island gold" as being a legend told around bonfires. In 2013, the island was referenced in an EP released by post-hardcore band, Our Last Night. The Money Pit is referenced in the lyrics to the title track, "Oak Island".
Museum exhibits.
In 2007, the island was featured in a museum display at the Maritime Museum of the Atlantic which displayed many artifacts from various eras of treasure hunting as part of the museum's exhibit "Pirates: Myth and Reality".
Video games.
In 2012, the island was featured in the video game "Assassin's Creed III" by Ubisoft. The player reaches Oak Island by completing quests related to Captain Kidd. Inside is a cave full of natural emeralds and an equippable ring that deflects enemy bullets.
Television.
The island is a major plot device in the episode "The Man with the Bone" of the crime drama television series "Bones". Additionally, the Oak Island mystery led to the ill-fated Cork Graham/Richard Knight hunt for Captain Kidd's treasure off Vietnam in 1983, documented in "The Bamboo Chest".
The Money Pit mystery is the subject of an 18 January 1979 episode of the television series "In Search of...". It is also featured on an episode of the television documentary series "Northern Mysteries" and covered extensively in the "Ancient Aliens" television series on the History Channel. Canada's "The Conspiracy Show" aired an episode on the subject on 8 August 2014.
On January 5, 2014, the History Channel began airing "The Curse of Oak Island", a documentary series about a group of modern treasure hunters led and funded by two brothers, Rick and Marty Lagina, who purchased the majority of Oak Island in 2006. In the final episode of the first season of the show, the Laginas' team found a Spanish coin from the 1600s that predates the original Money Pit excavation. In the final episode of the second season, a sonar mapping device was lowered into a subterranean chamber over below the surface. The device revealed that the chamber is roughly rectangular and contains at least two moderately large rectangular objects.

</doc>
<doc id="82334" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82334" title="Mason–Dixon line">
Mason–Dixon line

The Mason–Dixon line, also called Mason's and Dixon's line, was surveyed between 1763 and 1767 by Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon in the resolution of a border dispute involving Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Delaware in Colonial America. It is still a demarcation line among four U.S. states, forming part of the borders of Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, and West Virginia (originally part of Virginia).
Background.
Maryland's charter of 1632 granted the Calverts land north of the entire length of the Potomac River up to the 40th parallel. A problem arose when Charles II granted a charter for Pennsylvania in 1681. The grant defined Pennsylvania's southern border as identical to Maryland's northern border, but described it differently, as Charles relied on an inaccurate map. The terms of the grant clearly indicate that Charles II and William Penn believed the 40th parallel would intersect the Twelve-Mile Circle around New Castle, Delaware, when in fact it falls north of the original boundaries of the City of Philadelphia, the site of which Penn had already selected for his colony's capital city. Negotiations ensued after the problem was discovered in 1681. A compromise proposed by Charles II in 1682, which might have resolved the issue, was undermined by Penn receiving the additional grant of the "Three Lower Counties" along Delaware Bay, which later became the Delaware Colony, a satellite of Pennsylvania. Maryland considered these lands part of its original grant.
The conflict became more of an issue when settlement extended into the interior of the colonies. In 1732 the proprietary governor of Maryland, Charles Calvert, 5th Baron Baltimore, signed a provisional agreement with William Penn's sons, which drew a line somewhere in between and renounced the Calvert claim to Delaware. But later, Lord Baltimore claimed that the document he had signed did not contain the terms he had agreed to, and refused to put the agreement into effect. Beginning in the mid-1730s, violence erupted between settlers claiming various loyalties to Maryland and Pennsylvania. The border conflict would be known as Cresap's War.
Progress was made after a Court of Chancery ruling affirming the 1732 agreement, but the issue remained unresolved until Frederick Calvert, 6th Baron Baltimore ceased contesting the claims on the Maryland side and accepted the earlier agreements. Maryland's border with Delaware was to be based on the Transpeninsular Line and the Twelve-Mile Circle around New Castle. The Pennsylvania–Maryland border was defined as the line of latitude 15 miles south of the southernmost house in Philadelphia (on what is today South Street). As part of the settlement, the Penns and Calverts commissioned the English team of Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon to survey the newly established boundaries between the Province of Pennsylvania, the Province of Maryland, and Delaware Colony.
In 1779, Pennsylvania and Virginia agreed "To extend Mason's and Dixon's line, due west, five degrees of longitude, to be computed from the river Delaware, for the southern boundary of Pennsylvania, and that a meridian, drawn from the western extremity thereof to the northern limit of the said state, be the western boundary of Pennsylvania for ever."
After Pennsylvania abolished slavery in 1781, the western part of this line and the Ohio River became a border between slave and free states, although Delaware retained slavery until the Thirteenth Amendment was ratified in 1865.
Geography of the line.
Mason's and Dixon's actual survey line began to the south of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and extended from a benchmark east to the Delaware River and west to what was then the boundary with western Virginia.
The surveyors also fixed the boundary between Delaware and Pennsylvania and the approximately north–south portion of the boundary between Delaware and Maryland. Most of the Delaware–Pennsylvania boundary is an arc, and the Delaware–Maryland boundary does not run truly north-south because it was intended to bisect the Delmarva Peninsula rather than follow a meridian.
The Maryland–Pennsylvania boundary is an east–west line with an approximate mean latitude of 39°43′20″ N (Datum WGS 84). In reality, the east–west Mason–Dixon line is not a true line in the geometric sense, but is instead a series of many adjoining line segments, following a path between latitude 39°43′15″ N and 39°43′23″ N.
The surveyors also extended the boundary line 40 miles west of Maryland's western boundary, into territory that was still in dispute between Pennsylvania and Virginia, though this was contrary to their original charter. Mason's and Dixon's survey was finished on October 9, 1767, about 31 miles east of what is now Pennsylvania's southwest corner.
In 1774 commissioners from Pennsylvania and Virginia met to negotiate their boundary, which at the time involved Pennsylvania's southern border west of Maryland and its entire western border. Both sides agreed that Pennsylvania's grant made its western border a tracing of the course of the Delaware River, displaced five degrees to the west. And both sides thought this would place Fort Pitt in Virginia territory (in fact it would not have). With that in mind the governor of Pennsylvania argued that despite the agreement reached with Maryland, Pennsylvania's southern border west of Maryland was still the 39th parallel, about 50 miles south of the Mason–Dixon line. Negotiations continued for five years with a series of proposed lines. In the end a compromise was reached: the Mason–Dixon line would be extended west to a point five degrees west of the Delaware River. To compensate Pennsylvania for the claimed territory lost, its western boundary would be run due north rather than copying the course of the Delaware River.
The Mason–Dixon line was marked by stones every mile and "crownstones" every five miles, using stone shipped from England. The Maryland side says (M) and the Delaware and Pennsylvania sides say (P). Crownstones include the two coats-of-arms. Today, while a number of the original stones are missing or buried, many are still visible, resting on public land and protected by iron cages.
Mason and Dixon confirmed earlier survey work which delineated Delaware's southern boundary from the Atlantic Ocean to the "Middle Point" stone (along what is today known as the Transpeninsular Line). They proceeded nearly due north from this to the Pennsylvania border.
Later the line was marked in places by additional benchmarks and survey markers. The lines have been resurveyed several times over the centuries without substantive changes to Mason's and Dixon's work. The stones may be a few to a few hundred feet east or west of the point Mason and Dixon thought they were; in any event, the line drawn from stone to stone forms the legal boundary.
According to Dave Doyle at the National Geodetic Survey, part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the common corner of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Delaware, at The Wedge is marked by Boundary Monument #87. The marker "MDP Corner" dates from 1935 and is offset on purpose.
Doyle said the Maryland–Pennsylvania Mason–Dixon line is exactly:
and Boundary Monument #87 is on that parallel, at:
Visitors to the tripoint are strongly encouraged to first obtain permission from the nearest landowner, or use the path from the arc corner monument which is bordered by Delaware parkland most of the way, and Pennsylvania parkland the entire way.
History.
The line was established to end a boundary dispute between the British colonies of Maryland and Pennsylvania/Delaware. Maryland had been granted the territory north of the Potomac River up to the fortieth parallel. Pennsylvania's grant defined the colony's southern boundary as following a 12-mile (radius) circle counter-clockwise from the Delaware River until it hit "the beginning of the fortieth degree of Northern latitude." From there the boundary was to follow the fortieth parallel due west for five degrees of longitude. But the fortieth parallel does not in fact intersect the 12-mile circle, instead lying significantly farther north. Thus Pennsylvania's southern boundary as defined in its charter was contradictory and unclear. The most serious problem was that the Maryland claim would put Philadelphia, which became the major city in Pennsylvania, within Maryland.
The dispute was peacefully resolved in 1767 when the boundary was fixed as follows:
The disputants engaged an expert British team, astronomer Charles Mason and surveyor Jeremiah Dixon, to survey what became known as the Mason–Dixon line. It cost the Calverts of Maryland and the Penns of Pennsylvania £3,512/9 s to have surveyed with such accuracy. To them the money was well spent, for in a new country there was no other way of establishing ownership.
The Mason–Dixon line is made up of four segments corresponding to the terms of the settlement:
The most difficult task was fixing the tangent line, as they had to confirm the accuracy of the transpeninsular line midpoint and the 12-mile circle, determine the tangent point along the circle, and then actually survey and monument the border. They then surveyed the north and arc lines. They did this work between 1763 and 1767. This actually left a small wedge of land in dispute between Delaware and Pennsylvania until 1921.
In April 1765, Mason and Dixon began their survey of the more famous Maryland–Pennsylvania line. They were commissioned to run it for a distance of five degrees of longitude west from the Delaware River, fixing the western boundary of Pennsylvania (see the entry for Yohogania County). However, in October 1767, at Dunkard Creek near Mount Morris, Pennsylvania, nearly west of the Delaware, their Iroquois guides refused to go any further, having reached the border of their lands with the Lenape, with whom they were engaged in hostilities. As such the group was forced to quit, and on October 11, they made their final observations, from their starting point.
In 1784, surveyors David Rittenhouse and Andrew Ellicott and their crew completed the survey of the Mason–Dixon line to the southwest corner of Pennsylvania, five degrees from the Delaware River. Other surveyors continued west to the Ohio River. The section of the line between the southwestern corner of Pennsylvania and the river is the county line between Marshall and Wetzel counties, West Virginia.
The Mason–Dixon line has been resurveyed three times: in 1849, 1900, and in the 1960s. On November 14, 1963, during the bicentennial of the Mason–Dixon line, U.S. President John F. Kennedy opened a newly completed section of Interstate 95 where it crossed the Maryland–Delaware border. It was one of his last public appearances before his assassination in Dallas, Texas. The Delaware Turnpike and the Maryland portion of the new road were later designated as the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway.
Systematic errors and experiments to weigh the earth.
Mason and Dixon could only do the work as accurately as they did due to the work of Nevil Maskelyne, some of whose instruments they used. There was keen interest in their work and much communication between the surveyors, Maskelyne and other members of the British Scientific establishment in the Royal Society in Britain, notably Henry Cavendish.
During such survey work it is normal to survey from point to point along the line and then survey back to the starting point, where if there were no errors the origin and re-surveyed position would coincide. Normally the return errors would be random – i.e. the return survey errors compared to the intermediate points back to the start point would be spacially randomly distributed around the start point. Mason and Dixon found that there were larger than expected systematic errors, i.e. non-random errors, that led the return survey consistently being in one direction away from the starting point. When this information got back to the Royal Society members, Henry Cavendish realised that this may have been due to the gravitational pull of the Allegheny Mountains deflecting the theodolite plumb-bobs and spirit levels. Maskelyne then proposed measuring the gravitational force causing this deflection induced by the pull of a nearby mountain upon a plumb-bob in 1772 and sent Mason (who had returned to England) on a site survey through central England and Scotland to find a suitable location during the summer of 1773. Mason selected Schiehallion at which to conduct what became known as the Schiehallion experiment which was carried out primarily by Maskelyne and determined the density of the Scottish mountain. Several years later Cavendish used a very sensitive torsion balance to carry out the Cavendish experiment and determine the density of the Earth.
In culture.
Symbolism.
In popular usage, the Mason–Dixon line symbolizes a cultural boundary between the North and the South (Dixie). After Pennsylvania abolished slavery, it served as a demarcation line for the legality of slavery. That demarcation did not extend beyond Pennsylvania because Delaware, then a slave state, extended north and east of the boundary.
Also lying north and east of the boundary was New Jersey, where slavery was formally abolished in 1846, but former slaves continued to be "apprenticed" to their masters until the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1865.
The Missouri Compromise line had a much clearer geographic connection to slavery in the United States leading up to the Civil War.
References.
Notes
Further reading

</doc>
<doc id="82338" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82338" title="Primal Scream (disambiguation)">
Primal Scream (disambiguation)

Primal Scream may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="82340" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82340" title="Château d'Angers">
Château d'Angers

The Château d'Angers is a castle in the city of Angers in the Loire Valley, in the "département" of Maine-et-Loire, in France. Founded in the 9th century by the Counts of Anjou, was expanded to its current size in the 13th century. It is located overhanging the river Maine. Now open to the public, the Château d'Angers is home of the Apocalypse Tapestry.
History.
Originally, this castle was built as a fortress at one of the sites inhabited by the Romans because of its strategic defensive location.
In the 9th century, the Bishop of Angers gave the Counts of Anjou permission to build a castle in Angers. It became part of the Angevin empire of the Plantagenet Kings of England during the 12th century. In 1204, the region was conquered by Philip II and an enormous castle was built during the minority of his grandson, Louis IX ("Saint Louis") in the early part of the 13th century. The construction undertaken in 1234 cost 4,422 livres, roughly one per cent of the estimated royal revenue at the time. Louis gave the castle to his brother, Charles in 1246.
In 1352, King John II "le Bon", gave the castle to his second son, Louis who later became count of Anjou. Married to the daughter of the wealthy Duke of Brittany, Louis had the castle modified, and in 1373 commissioned the famous "Apocalypse Tapestry" from the painter Hennequin de Bruges and the Parisian tapestry-weaver Nicolas Bataille. Louis II (Louis I's son) and Yolande d'Aragon added a chapel (1405–12) and royal apartments to the complex. The chapel is a "sainte chapelle", the name given to churches which enshrined a relic of the Passion. The relic at Angers was a splinter of the fragment of the True Cross which had been acquired by Louis IX.
In the early 15th century, the hapless dauphin who, with the assistance of Joan of Arc would become King Charles VII, had to flee Paris and was given sanctuary at the Château d' Angers.
In 1562, Catherine de' Medici had the castle restored as a powerful fortress, but, her son, Henry III, reduced the height of the towers and had the towers and walls stripped of their embattlements; Henry III used the castle stones to build streets and develop the village of Angers. Nonetheless, under threat of attacks from the Huguenots, the king maintained the castle's defensive capabilities by making it a military outpost and by installing artillery on the château's upper terraces. At the end of the 18th century, as a military garrison, it showed its worth when its thick walls withstood a massive bombardment by cannons from the Vendean army. Unable to do anything else, the invaders simply gave up.
A military academy was established in the castle to train young officers in the strategies of war. Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, best known for taking part in the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte at the Battle of Waterloo, was trained at the Military Academy of Angers. The academy was moved to Saumur and the castle was used for the rest of the 19th century as a prison, powder magazine, and barracks.
Modern.
The castle continued to be used as an armory through the First and Second World Wars. It was severely damaged during World War II by the Nazis when an ammunition storage dump inside the castle exploded.
On 10 January 2009, the castle suffered severe damage from an accidental fire due to short-circuiting. The Royal Logis, which contains old tomes and administrative offices, was the most heavily damaged part of the chateau, resulting in of the roof being completely burnt. The Tapestries of the Apocalypse were not damaged. Total damages have been estimated at 2 million Euros. According to Christine Albanel, the Minister of Culture, the expected date of completion for the restoration is the second trimester of 2009.
Today, owned by the City of Angers, the massive, austere castle has been converted to a museum housing the oldest and largest collection of medieval tapestries in the world, with the 14th century "Apocalypse Tapestry" as one of its priceless treasures. As a tribute to its fortitude, the castle has never been taken by any invading force in history.
Layout.
The outer wall is thick, extends for about and is protected by seventeen massive towers. Each of the perimeter towers measures in diameter. The château covers an area of . Two pairs of towers form the city and landward entrances of the château. Each of the towers was once in height, but they were later cut down for the use of artillery pieces. The Tour du Moulin is the only tower which conserves the original elevation.

</doc>
<doc id="82341" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82341" title="Factorization">
Factorization

In mathematics, factorization ("also" factorisation in some forms of British English) or factoring is the decomposition of an object (for example, a number, a polynomial, or a matrix) into a product of other objects, or "factors", which when multiplied together give the original. For example, the number 15 factors into primes as 3 × 5, and the polynomial "x"2 − 4 factors as ("x" − 2)("x" + 2). In all cases, a product of simpler objects is obtained.
The aim of factoring is usually to reduce something to “basic building blocks”, such as numbers to prime numbers, or polynomials to irreducible polynomials. Factoring integers is covered by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic and factoring polynomials by the fundamental theorem of algebra. Viète's formulas relate the coefficients of a polynomial to its roots.
The opposite of polynomial factorization is expansion, the multiplying together of polynomial factors to an “expanded” polynomial, written as just a sum of terms.
Integer factorization for large integers appears to be a difficult problem. There is no known method to carry it out quickly. Its complexity is the basis of the assumed security of some public key cryptography algorithms, such as RSA.
A matrix can also be factorized into a product of matrices of special types, for an application in which that form is convenient. One major example of this uses an orthogonal or unitary matrix, and a triangular matrix. There are different types: QR decomposition, "LQ", "QL", "RQ", "RZ".
Another example is the factorization of a function as the composition of other functions having certain properties; for example, every function can be viewed as the composition of a surjective function with an injective function. This situation is generalized by factorization systems.
Integers.
By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every positive integer greater than 1 has a unique prime factorization. Given an algorithm for integer factorization, one can factor any integer down to its constituent primes by repeated application of this algorithm. For very large numbers, no efficient classical algorithm is known.
Polynomials.
Modern techniques for factoring polynomials are fast and efficient, but use sophisticated mathematical ideas (see Factorization of polynomials). These techniques are used in the construction of computer routines for carrying out polynomial factorization in Computer algebra systems. The more classical hand techniques rely on either the polynomial to be factored having low degree or the recognition of the polynomial as belonging to a certain class of known examples and are not very suitable for computer implementation. This article is concerned with these classical techniques.
While the general notion of factoring just means writing an expression as a product of simpler expressions, the vague term "simpler" will be defined more precisely for special classes of expressions. When factoring polynomials this means that the factors are to be polynomials of smaller degree. Thus, while formula_1 is a factorization of the expression, it is not a "polynomial factorization" since the factors are not polynomials. Also, the factoring of a constant term, as in formula_2 would not be considered a polynomial factorization since one of the factors does not have a smaller degree than the original expression. Another issue concerns the coefficients of the factors. In basic treatments it is desirable to have the coefficients of the factors be of the same type as the coefficients of the original polynomial, that is factoring polynomials with integer coefficients into factors with integer coefficients, or factoring polynomials with real coefficients into polynomials with real coefficients. It is not always possible to do this, and a polynomial that can not be factored in this way is said to be "irreducible" over this type of coefficient. Thus, x2 -2 is irreducible over the integers and x2 + 4 is irreducible over the reals. In the first example, the integers 1 and -2 can also be thought of as real numbers, and if they are, then formula_3 shows that this polynomial factors over the reals (sometimes it is said that the polynomial "splits" over the reals). Similarly, since the integers 1 and 4 can be thought of as real and hence complex numbers, x2 + 4 splits over the complex numbers, i.e. formula_4.
The fundamental theorem of algebra can be stated as: Every polynomial of degree "n" with complex number coefficients splits completely into "n" linear factors. The terms in these factors, which are the roots of the polynomial, may be real or complex. Since complex roots of polynomials with real coefficients come in complex conjugate pairs, this result implies that every polynomial with real coefficients splits into linear and/or irreducible quadratic factors with real coefficients (because when two linear factors with complex conjugate terms are multiplied together, the result is a quadratic with real coefficients). Even though the structure of the factorization is known in these cases, finding the actual factors can be computationally challenging, and by the Abel-Ruffini theorem the coefficients and additive terms in the factors may not be expressible in terms of radicals.
History of factoring polynomials.
Students who are introduced to factoring as a primary method of solving quadratic equations might be surprised to know it is one of the newest methods of solving them. Vera Sanford points out in her "A Short History of Mathematics" (1930) that “In view of the present emphasis given to the solution of quadratic equations by factoring, it is interesting to note that this method was not used until Harriot’s work of 1631. Even in this case, however, the author ignores the factors that give rise to negative roots.” Harriot died in 1621, and like all his books, this one, "Artis Analyticae Praxis ad Aequationes Algebraicas Resolvendas", was published after his death. An article on Harriot at the Univ of Saint Andrews math history web site says that in his personal writing on solving equations Harriot did use both positive and negative solutions, but his editor, Walter Warner, did not present this in his book. Harriot’s method of factoring may look different than what modern students expect. In the first section (Sectio Prima) Harriot draws tables to illustrate the addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of monomial, binomial, and trinomial terms. Then in the second section he shows a more direct multiplication that provides the foundation to his factoring method. He sets up the equation , and shows that this matches the form of multiplication he has previously provided as,
thus factoring the four terms of the adjusted expression .
This example can be seen on page 16 of the "Artis Analyticae Praxis ad Aequationes Algebraicas Resolvendas". 
Harriot writes out a form for each of the possibilities of with being the unknown (where we might use today) and then when he needs to factor he picks on one of the forms that match. By separating out the linear coefficient into two parts he is able to break the problem into one of the forms.
General methods.
There are only a few general methods that can be applied to any polynomial in either one variable (the "univariate" case) or several variables (the "multivariate" case).
Highest common factor.
Finding, by inspection, the monomial that is the highest common factor (also called the "greatest common divisor") of all the terms of the polynomial and factoring it out as a common factor is an application of the distributive law. This is the most commonly used factoring technique. For example:
Factoring by grouping.
A method that is sometimes useful, but not guaranteed to work, is factoring by grouping.
Factoring by grouping is done by placing the terms in the polynomial into two or more groups, where each group can be factored by a known method. The results of these partial factorizations can sometimes be combined to give a factorization of the original expression. 
For example, to factor the polynomial
While grouping may not lead to a factorization in general, if the polynomial expression to be factored consists of four terms and is the result of multiplying two binomial expressions (by the FOIL method for instance), then the grouping technique can lead to a factorization, as in the above example.
Using the factor theorem.
For a univariate polynomial, "p"("x"), the factor theorem states that "a" is a "root" of the polynomial (that is, "p"("a") = 0, also called a "zero" of the polynomial) if and only if ("x" - "a") is a factor of "p"("x"). The other factor in such a factorization of "p"("x") can be obtained by polynomial long division or synthetic division. 
For example, consider the polynomial formula_10 By inspection we see that 1 is a root of this polynomial (observe that the coefficients add up to 0), so ("x" - 1) is a factor of the polynomial. By long division we have formula_11
Univariate case, using properties of the roots.
When a univariate polynomial is completely factored into linear factors (degree one factors), all of the roots of the polynomial are visible and by multiplying the factors together again, the relationship between the roots and the coefficients can be observed. Formally, these relationships are known as 
Vieta's formulas. These formulas do not help in factorizing the polynomial except as a guide to making good guesses at what possible roots may be. However, if some additional information about the roots is known, this can be combined with the formulas to obtain the roots and thus the factorization.
For example, we can factor formula_12 if we know that the sum of two of its roots is zero. Let formula_13 and formula_14 be the three roots of this polynomial. Then Vieta's formulas are:
Assuming that formula_16 immediately gives formula_17 and reduces the other two equations to formula_18 Thus the roots are 5, 4 and -4 and we have formula_19
Finding rational roots.
If a (univariate) polynomial, "f"("x"), has a rational root, "p"/"q" ("p" and "q" are integers and "q" ≠ 0), then by the factor theorem "f"("x") has the factor,
If, in addition, the polynomial "f"("x") has integer coefficients, then "q" must evenly divide the integer portion of the highest common factor of the terms of the polynomial, and, in the factorization of "f"("x"), only the factor ("qx" - "p") will be visible.
If a (univariate) polynomial with integer coefficients, say,
has a rational root "p"/"q", where "p" and "q" are integers that are relatively prime, then by the rational root test "p" is an integer divisor of "a""n" and "q" is an integer divisor of "a"0.
If we wished to factorize the polynomial formula_22 we could look for rational roots "p"/"q" where "p" divides -6, "q" divides 2 and "p" and "q" have no common factor greater than 1. By inspection we see that this polynomial can have no negative roots. Assume that "q" = 2 (otherwise we would be looking for integer roots), substitute "x" = "p"/2 and set the polynomial equal to 0. By multiplying by 4, we obtain the polynomial equation formula_23 that will have an integer solution of 1 or 3 if the original polynomial had a rational root of the type we seek. Since 3 is a solution of this equation (and 1 is not), the original polynomial had the rational root 3/2 and the corresponding factor (2"x" - 3). By polynomial long division we have the factorization formula_24
For a quadratic polynomial with integer coefficients having rational roots, the above considerations lead to a factorization technique known as the "ac method" of factorization. Suppose that the quadratic polynomial with integer coefficients is:
and it has rational roots, "p"/"q" and "u"/"v". (If the discriminant, formula_26, is a square number these exist, otherwise we have irrational or complex solutions, and there will be no rational roots.) Both "q" and "v" must be divisors of "a" so we may write these fractions with a common denominator of "a", that is, they may be written as -"r"/"a" and -"s"/"a" (the use of the negatives is cosmetic and leads to a prettier final result.) Then,
So, we have:
where "rs" = "ac" and "r" + "s" = "b". The "ac method" for factoring the quadratic polynomial is to find "r" and "s", the two factors of the number "ac" whose sum is "b" and then use them in the factorization formula of the original quadratic above. 
As an example consider the quadratic polynomial:
Inspection of the factors of "ac" = 36 leads to 4 + 9 = 13 = "b".
Recognizable patterns.
While taking the product of two (or more) expressions can be done by following a multiplication algorithm, the reverse process of factoring relies frequently on the recognition of a pattern in the expression to be factored and recalling how such a pattern arises. The following are some well known patterns.
Difference of two squares.
A common type of algebraic factoring is for the difference of two squares. It is the application of the formula
to any two terms, whether or not they are perfect squares.
This basic form is often used with more complicated expressions that may not a first look like the difference of two squares. For example,
Sum/difference of two cubes.
Another formula for factoring is for the sum or difference of two cubes. The sum can be factored by
and the difference by
Difference of two fourth powers.
Another formula is for the difference of two fourth powers, which is
Sum/difference of two nth powers.
The above factorizations of differences or sums of powers can be extended to any positive integer power "n".
For any "n", a general factorization is:
The corresponding formula for the sum of two "n"th powers depends on whether "n" is even or odd.
If "n" is odd, "b" can be replaced by −"b" in the above formula, to give
If "n" is even, we consider two cases:
Specifically, for some small values of "n" we have:
Sum/difference of two nth powers over the field of the algebraic numbers.
The above factorizations give factors with coefficients in the same field as those of the expression being factored—for example, a polynomial with rational coefficients (±1 in many cases above) is split into factors which themselves have rational coefficients. However, a factorization into factors with algebraic numbers as coefficients can yield lower-degree factors, as in the following formulas which can be proven by going through the complex conjugate roots of formula_47
The sum of two terms that have equal even powers is factored by
The difference of two terms that have equal even powers is factored by
The sum or difference of two terms that have equal odd powers is factored by
For instance, the sum or difference of two fifth powers is factored by
and the sum of two fourth powers is factored by
Binomial expansions.
The binomial theorem supplies patterns of coefficients that permit easily recognized factorizations when the polynomial is a power of a binomial expression.
For example, the "perfect square trinomials" are the quadratic polynomials that can be factored as follows:
and
Some cubic polynomials are "four term perfect cubes" that can be factored as:
and
In general, the coefficients of the expanded polynomial formula_57 are given by the "n"-th row of Pascal's triangle. The coefficients of formula_58 have the same absolute value but alternate in sign.
Using formulas for polynomial roots.
Any univariate quadratic polynomial (polynomials of the form formula_60) can be factored over the field of complex numbers using the quadratic formula, as follows:
where formula_62 and formula_63 are the two roots of the polynomial, either both real or both complex in the case where "a, b, c" are all real, found with the quadratic formula.
The quadratic formula is valid for all polynomials with coefficients in any field (in particular, the real or complex numbers) except those that have characteristic two. 
There are also formulas for cubic and quartic polynomials which can be used in the same way. However, there are no algebraic formulas in terms of the coefficients that apply to all univariate polynomials of a higher degree, by the Abel-Ruffini theorem.
Factoring over the complex numbers.
Sum of two squares.
If "a" and "b" represent real numbers, then the sum of their squares can be written as the product of complex numbers. This produces the factorization formula:
For example, formula_65 can be factored into formula_66.

</doc>
<doc id="82342" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82342" title="Lymph node">
Lymph node

A lymph node is an oval or kidney-shaped organ of the lymphatic system, distributed widely throughout the body including the armpit and stomach and linked by lymphatic vessels. Lymph nodes are major sites of B, T, and other immune cells. Lymph nodes are important for the proper functioning of the immune system, acting as filters for foreign particles and cancer cells. Lymph nodes do not deal with toxicity, which is primarily dealt with by the liver and kidneys.
Lymph nodes also have clinical significance. They become inflamed or enlarged in various infections and diseases which may range from trivial throat infections, to life-threatening cancers. The condition of the lymph nodes is very important in cancer staging, which decides the treatment to be used, and determines the prognosis. When swollen, inflamed or enlarged, lymph nodes can be hard, firm or tender.
Structure.
Lymph nodes are kidney or oval shaped and range in size from a few millimeters to about 1–2 cm long. Each lymph node is surrounded by a fibrous capsule, and inside the lymph node the fibrous capsule extends to form trabeculae. The substance of the lymph node is divided into the outer cortex and the inner medulla. The cortex is continuous around the medulla except at the hilum, where the medulla comes in direct contact with the hilum.
Thin reticular fibers and elastin form a supporting meshwork called a "reticular network" inside the node. White blood cells (leukocytes), the most prominent ones being lymphocytes, are tightly packed in the follicles (B cells) and the cortex (T cells). Elsewhere in the node, there are only occasional leucocytes. As part of the reticular network there are follicular dendritic cells in the B cell follicle and fibroblastic reticular cells in the T cell cortex. The reticular network not only provides the structural support, but also the surface for adhesion of the dendritic cells, macrophages and lymphocytes. It allows exchange of material with blood through the high endothelial venules and provides the growth and regulatory factors necessary for activation and maturation of immune cells.
The number and composition of follicles can change especially when challenged by an antigen, when they develop a germinal center.
Lymph enters the convex side of the lymph node through multiple afferent lymphatic vessels, to flow through the sinuses. A lymph sinus which includes the subcapsular sinus, is a channel within the node, lined by endothelial cells along with fibroblastic reticular cells and this allows for the smooth flow of lymph through them.The endothelium of the subcapsular sinus is continuous with that of the afferent lymph vessel and is also with that of the similar sinuses flanking the trabeculae and within the cortex. All of these sinuses drain the filtered lymphatic fluid into the medullary sinuses, from where the lymph flows into the efferent lymph vessels to exit the node at the hilum on the concave side. These vessels are smaller and don't allow the passage of the macrophages so that they remain contained to function within the lymph node. In the course of the lymph, lymphocytes may be activated as part of the adaptive immune response.
Capsule.
The lymph node capsule is composed of dense irregular connective tissue with some plain muscle fibers, and from its internal surface are given off a number of membranous processes or trabeculae, consisting, in humans, of connective tissue, with a small admixture of plain muscle fibers; but in many of the lower animals composed almost entirely of involuntary muscle. They pass inward, radiating toward the center of the gland, for about one-third or one-fourth of the space between the circumference and the center of the node. In some animals they are sufficiently well-marked to divide the peripheral or cortical portion of the gland into a number of compartments (follicles), but in humans this arrangement is not obvious. The larger trabeculae springing from the capsule break up into finer bands, and these interlace to form a mesh-work in the central or medullary portion of the gland. In these spaces formed by the interlacing trabeculae is contained the proper gland substance or lymphoid tissue. The gland pulp does not, however, completely fill the spaces, but leaves, between its outer margin and the enclosing trabeculae, a channel or space of uniform width throughout. This is termed the subcapsular sinus (lymph path or lymph sinus). Running across it are a number of finer trabeculæ of reticular connective tissue, the fibers of which are, for the most part, covered by ramifying cells.
Subcapsular sinus.
The subcapsular sinus (lymph path, lymph sinus, marginal sinus) is the space between the capsule and the cortex which allows the free movement of lymphatic fluid and so contains a sparsity of lymphocytes. It is continuous with the similar lymph sinuses that flank the trabeculae.
The lymph node contains lymphoid tissue, i.e., a meshwork or fibers called "reticulum" with white blood cells enmeshed in it. The regions where there are few cells within the meshwork are known as "lymph sinus". It is lined by reticular cells, fibroblasts and fixed macrophages.
The subcapsular sinus has clinical importance as it is the most likely location where the earliest manifestations of a metastatic carcinoma in a lymph node would be found.
Cortex.
The cortex of the lymph node is the peripheral portion underneath the capsule and the subcapsular sinus. The subcapsular sinus drains to trabecular sinuses, and then the lymph flows into the medullary sinuses.
The outer cortex consists mainly of the B cells arranged as follicles, which may develop a germinal center when challenged with an antigen, and the deeper cortex mainly consisting of the T cells. There is a zone known as the subcortical zone where T-cells (or cells that are mainly red) mainly interact with dendritic cells, and where the reticular network is dense. The predominant site within the lymph nodes which contain T cells & accessory cells is also known as paracortex (reticular network).
Medulla.
The medulla contains large blood vessels, sinuses and medullary cords that contain antibody-secreting plasma cells.
The medullary cords are cords of lymphatic tissue, and include plasma cells, macrophages, and B cells. The medullary sinuses (or "sinusoids") are vessel-like spaces separating the medullary cords. Lymph flows into the medullary sinuses from cortical sinuses, and into efferent lymphatic vessels. Medullary sinuses contain histiocytes (immobile macrophages) and reticular cells.
Function.
The lymph fluid inside the lymph nodes contains lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell, which continuously recirculates through the lymph nodes and the bloodstream. Molecules found on bacteria cell walls or chemical substances secreted from bacteria, called antigens, may be taken up by dedicated antigen presenting cells such as dendritic cells into the lymph system and then into lymph nodes. In response to the antigens, the lymphocytes in the lymph node make antibodies which will go out of the lymph node into circulation, seek, and target the pathogens producing the antigens by targeting them for destruction by other cells and complement. Other immune system cells will be made to fight the infection and "sent" to the lymph nodes. The increased numbers of immune system cells fighting the infection will make the node expand and become "swollen."
Lymph circulates to the lymph node via "afferent lymphatic vessels" and drains into the node just beneath the capsule in a space called the subcapsular sinus. The subcapsular sinus drains into trabecular sinuses and finally into medullary sinuses. The sinus space is criss-crossed by the pseudopods of macrophages, which act to trap foreign particles and filter the lymph. The medullary sinuses converge at the hilum and lymph then leaves the lymph node via the "efferent lymphatic vessel" towards either a more central lymph node or ultimately for drainage into a central venous subclavian blood vessel.
When a lymphocyte recognizes an antigen, B cells become activated and migrate to germinal centers (by definition, a "secondary nodule" has a germinal center, while a "primary nodule" does not). When antibody-producing plasma cells are formed, they migrate to the medullary cords. Stimulation of the lymphocytes by antigens can accelerate the migration process to about 10 times normal, resulting in characteristic swelling of the lymph nodes.
The spleen and tonsils are large lymphoid organs that serve similar functions to lymph nodes, though the spleen filters blood cells rather than lymph.
Clinical significance.
Lymph nodes may become enlarged due to an infection, tumour or inflamed due to leukemia. This increase in size is primarily due to an elevated rate of trafficking of lymphocytes into the node from the blood, exceeding the rate of outflow from the node. They may also be enlarged secondarily as a result of the activation and proliferation of antigen-specific T and B cells (clonal expansion). In some cases, where there is no infection they may still feel enlarged due to a previous infection.
Lymphadenopathy is a term meaning "disease of the lymph nodes." It is, however, almost synonymously used with "swollen or enlarged lymph nodes." In this case, the lymph nodes are detectable by touch (palpable); this is a sign of various infections and diseases.
Lymphedema is a fairly widespread condition of the lymphatic system resulting in localised fluid retention and tissue swelling. Affected tissues are at risk of infection. Primary lymphedema generally results from poorly developed or missing lymph nodes. Secondary lymphedema results mostly from the dissection of lymph nodes during breast cancer surgery and also from other treatments usually involving radiation.

</doc>
<doc id="82345" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82345" title="Mockumentary">
Mockumentary

A mockumentary (a portmanteau of the words "mock" and "documentary") or docucomedy is a type of film or television show in which fictional events are presented in documentary style to create a parody. These productions are often used to analyze or comment on current events and issues by using a fictional setting, or to parody the documentary form itself. They may be either comedic or dramatic in form, although comedic mockumentaries are more common. A dramatic mockumentary (sometimes referred to as docufiction) should not be confused with docudrama, a fictional genre in which dramatic techniques are combined with documentary elements to depict real events.
Mockumentaries are often presented as historical documentaries, with B roll and talking heads discussing past events, or as cinéma vérité pieces following people as they go through various events. Examples emerged during the 1950s when archival film footage became relatively easy to locate. A very early example was a short piece on the "Swiss Spaghetti Harvest" that appeared as an April fools' joke on the British television program "Panorama" in 1957.
The term "mockumentary", which originated in the 1960s, was popularized in the mid-1980s when "This Is Spinal Tap" director Rob Reiner used it in interviews to describe that film.
Mockumentaries are often partly or wholly improvised, as an unscripted style of acting helps to maintain the pretense of reality. Comedic mockumentaries rarely have laugh tracks, also to sustain the atmosphere, although there are exceptions.
Early examples.
Early work, including Luis Buñuel's 1933 "Land Without Bread", Orson Welles's 1938 radio broadcast of "The War of the Worlds", various April Fool's Day news reports, and vérité style film and television during the 1960s and 1970s, served as precursor to the genre.
Early examples of mock-documentaries include "A Hard Day's Night", 1964, (written by Alun Owen, purporting to describe several days in the lives of The Beatles, that would be the first feature-length mockumentary), "David Holzman's Diary", 1967, "Pat Paulsen for President", 1968, "Take the Money and Run", 1969, "The Clowns", 1970, by Frederico Fellini (a peculiar hybrid of documentary and fiction, a docufiction) and "All You Need Is Cash", 1978. Albert Brooks was also an early popularizer of the mockumentary style with his film "Real Life", 1979, a spoof of a PBS documentary.
Woody Allen's "Take the Money and Run" is presented in documentary-style with Allen playing a fictional criminal, Virgil Starkwell, whose crime exploits are "explored" throughout the film. Jackson Beck, who used to narrate documentaries in the 1940s, provides the voice-over narration. Fictional interviews are interspliced throughout, especially those of Starkwell's parents who wear Groucho Marx noses and mustaches. This style of this film was widely appropriated by others and by Allen himself in "Zelig" (1983) and "Sweet and Lowdown" (1999).
Early use of the mockumentary format in television comedy may be seen in several sketches from "Monty Python's Flying Circus" (1969–1974), such as "Hell's Grannies", "Piranha Brothers", and "The Funniest Joke in the World". "The Hart and Lorne Terrific Hour" (1970–1971) also featured mockumentary pieces which interspersed both scripted and real life man-in-the-street interviews; the most famous likely being "The Puck Crisis" in which hockey pucks were claimed to have become infected with a form of Dutch elm disease.
Mockumentary since 1980.
In film.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, the mockumentary format has enjoyed considerable attention. Woody Allen's 1983 film "Zelig" stars Allen as a curiously nondescript enigma who is discovered for his remarkable ability to transform himself to resemble anyone he is near, and Allen is edited into historical archive footage.
In 1984, Christopher Guest co-wrote and starred in the mockumentary "This is Spinal Tap", directed by Rob Reiner, and went on co-writing and directing himself a series of films in the same genre. Films such as "Waiting for Guffman", "Best in Show" and "A Mighty Wind", all written with co-star Eugene Levy, were critical successes.
"Man Bites Dog" is a 1992 Belgian black comedy crime mockumentary written, produced and directed by Rémy Belvaux, André Bonzel and Benoît Poelvoorde.
In 1995, directed by Peter Jackson and Costa Botes, "Forgotten Silver" claimed New Zealand "director" Colin McKenzie to be a pioneer in filmmaking. When the film was later revealed to be a mockumentary, Jackson received criticism for tricking viewers.
"Dark Side of the Moon" is a 2002 French mockumentary by director William Karel. The premise for the film is the theory that the television footage from the Apollo 11 Moon landing was faked and actually recorded in a studio by the CIA with help from director Stanley Kubrick.
"FUBAR (film)" is a 2002 Canadian mockumentary film, directed by Michael Dowse, based on the lives of two lifelong friends and head-bangers living out their lives, constantly drinking beer.
"" is a 2004 mockumentary presenting an alternative history in which the Confederacy won the American Civil War.
"First on the Moon" (Russian: Первые на Луне, Pervye na Lune) is a 2005 Russian mockumentary about a fictional 1930s Soviet landing on the Moon.
"Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan" is a highly controversial yet successful film from 2006 which uses this style, as does "Brüno", a similar film from 2009.
"On the Ropes" is a 2011 mockumentary film written and directed by Mark Noyce. The film follows a fictional martial arts instructor and his rivalry with a local boxing gym.
"What We Do In The Shadows" is a 2014 horror/comedy mockumentary film directed and written by Taika Waititi and Jemaine Clement; the aforementioned directors also star in the production. The film is centered on vampire flat mates living in Wellington.
In television.
The 1983 "The Comic Strip Presents..." film "Bad News Tour" was a spoof rockumentary about a British heavy metal band. It preceded "Spinal Tap" by a year, but is not known to have been an influence on the U.S. film. The film led to LPs being released and the band really touring and was followed by a sequel, "More Bad News" in 1987.
Stella Street was a mockumentary which ran on the BBC from 1997 to 2001. It was written by Phil Cornwell, John Sessions and Peter Richardson and featured Cornwell and Sessions playing all the characters between them. The series was shot on handheld camcorders. Operation Good Guys, another low-budget BBC sitcom, ran for three series starting in 1997.
In television, the most notable mockumentaries in the 2000s have been: ABC Australia's "The Games" (1998–2000), Canadian series "Trailer Park Boys" (2001–present), the British shows "Marion and Geoff" (2000), "Twenty Twelve" (2011–2012) (which follows the fictional Olympic Deliverance Commission in the run up to the 2012 Summer Olympic Games) and W1A, which follows the main characters of Twenty Twelve as they start work at the BBC, "The Office" (2001) and its many international offshoots, "Come Fly with Me" (2010), which follows the activity at a fictional airport and its variety of staff and passengers. British comedy duo Jennifer Saunders and Dawn French often presented short mockumentaries as extended sketches in their TV show "French & Saunders". Discovery Channel opened its annual Shark Week on 4 Aug 2013 with ', a mockumentary about the survival of the Megalodon. Notable popular examples include sitcoms "The Office (U.S.)" (2005–2013), "Parks and Recreation" (2009–2015), and "Modern Family" (2009–present); the American improv comedy "Reno 911!" (2003–2009); the Canadian sitcom "Trailer Park Boys" and its films; the comedy series "The Muppets" (2015); the UK streaming sitcom "Derek" (2012–2014); the Australian Chris Lilley shows "Angry Boys", "Summer Heights High", ', "" and "Jonah from Tonga".
On radio.
The BBC series "People Like Us" was first produced for radio in 1995 before a television version was made in 1999.

</doc>
<doc id="82347" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82347" title="Ironbridge">
Ironbridge

Ironbridge is a village on the River Severn, at the heart of the Ironbridge Gorge, in Shropshire, England. It lies in the civil parish of The Gorge, in the borough of Telford and Wrekin. Ironbridge developed beside, and takes its name from, the famous Iron Bridge, a 30-metre (100 ft) cast iron bridge that was built across the river in 1779.
History.
The area around Ironbridge is described by those promoting it as a tourist destination as the "Birthplace of the Industrial Revolution". This description is based on the idea that Abraham Darby perfected the technique of smelting iron with coke, in Coalbrookdale, allowing much cheaper production of iron. However, the industrial revolution did not "begin" in one place, but in many.
Darby's iron smelting was but one small part of this generalised revolution and was soon superseded by the great iron-smelting areas. However, the bridge – being the first of its kind fabricated from cast iron, and one of the few which have survived to the present day – remains an important symbol representative of the dawn of the industrial age.
The grandson of the first Abraham Darby, Abraham Darby III, built the famous bridge – originally designed by Thomas Farnolls Pritchard – to link the two areas. Construction began in 1779 and the bridge opened on New Year's Day 1781. Soon afterwards the ancient Madeley market was relocated to the new purpose-built square and Georgian Butter Cross and the former dispersed settlement of Madeley Wood gained a planned urban focus as Ironbridge, the commercial and administrative centre of the Coalbrookdale coalfield.
The Iron Bridge proprietors also built the Tontine Hotel to accommodate visitors to the new bridge and the industrial sites of the Severn Gorge. On the hillside above the river are situated the stone-built 16th-century hunting lodge at Lincoln Hill, many 17th- and 18th-century workers' cottages, some imposing Georgian houses built by ironmasters and mine and canal barge owners, and many early Victorian villas built from the various coloured bricks and tiles of the locality.
St Luke's Church (1837) in simple Commissioners' Gothic by Samuel Smith of Madeley, has stained glass by David Evans of Shrewsbury. The living was endowed as a rectory when the parish was created from Madeley in 1847 and is now a united benefice with Coalbrookdale and Little Wenlock, in the Diocese of Hereford.
The former Iron Bridge and Broseley railway station, on the Severn Valley line (GWR) from Hartlebury to Shrewsbury, was situated on the south side of the Iron Bridge until 1966. The village was the birthplace of England National Football Team captain Billy Wright.
Present day.
By the 19th century, Ironbridge had had many well-known visitors, including Benjamin Disraeli, but by the mid-20th century the settlements and industries of the gorge were in decline. In 1986, though, Ironbridge became part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site (which covers the wider Ironbridge Gorge area) and has become a major tourist attraction within Shropshire. Most industries in Ironbridge are now tourist-related; however, the Merrythought teddy bear company (established in 1930) is still manufacturing in Ironbridge and has a small museum there too. Amongst other things, the village is still host to a Post Office, pharmacy, various pubs, cafés and many successful small shops.
On Thursday 10 July 2003 The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh made a visit to Shropshire which included a visit to Ironbridge, and a walk over the bridge itself.
An annual Coracle Regatta is held in August on the River Severn at Ironbridge, along with many other events throughout the year. This is mainly because the coracle-making family of Rogers lived in Ironbridge for several generations. Just outside Ironbridge in Coalbrookdale is the Ironbridge Institute, a partnership between the University of Birmingham and the Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust offering postgraduate and professional development in heritage.
Flooding.
Ironbridge has an annually recurring problem of flooding from the River Severn, as do many other parts of Shropshire. Flooding has previously caused much damage and disruption to the Wharfage, which accommodates both The Swan and White Hart pubs, and various private homes. Starting in February 2004, DEFRA in association with the Environment Agency implemented a portable barrier which is erected at times of floods. At its peak, the flood water has reached a depth of one metre against the barrier.

</doc>
<doc id="82348" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82348" title="Abraham Darby">
Abraham Darby

Abraham Darby may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="82354" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82354" title="Henry (unit)">
Henry (unit)

The henry (symbol H) is the unit of electrical inductance in the International System of Units. The unit is named after Joseph Henry (1797–1878), the American scientist who discovered electromagnetic induction independently of and at about the same time as Michael Faraday (1791–1867) in England. The magnetic permeability of vacuum is 4π×10−7 H m−1 (henry per metre).
The United States National Institute of Standards and Technology recommends English-speaking users of SI to write the plural as "henries".
Definition.
The inductance of an electric circuit is one henry when an electric current that is changing at one ampere per second results in an electromotive force of one volt across the inductor :
where "v(t)" denotes the resulting voltage across the circuit, "i(t)" is the current through the circuit, and "L" is the inductance of the circuit.
The henry is a derived unit based on four of the seven base units of the International System of Units: kilogram (kg), meter (m), second (s), and ampere (A).
Expressed in combinations of SI units, the henry is:
in which the following additional derived units occur: coulomb (C), farad (F), joule (J), weber (Wb), tesla (T), volt (V), hertz (Hz), and ohm (Ω).

</doc>
<doc id="82355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82355" title="Farad">
Farad

The farad (symbol: F) is the SI derived unit of electrical capacitance, the ability of a body to store an electrical charge. It is named after the English physicist Michael Faraday.
Definition.
One farad is defined as the capacitance across which, when charged with one coulomb, there is a potential difference of one volt. Equally, one farad can be described as the capacitance which stores a one coulomb charge across a potential difference of one volt.
The relationship between capacitance, charge and potential difference is linear. For example, if the potential difference across a capacitor is halved, the quantity of charge stored by that capacitor will also be halved.
For most applications, the farad is an impractically large unit of capacitance. Most electrical and electronic applications are covered by the following SI prefixes:
Equalities.
A farad has the base SI representation of:
s × A × m × kg
It can further be expressed as:
where F=farad, A=ampere, V=volt, C=coulomb, J=joule, m=metre, N=newton, s=second, W=watt, kg=kilogram, Ω=ohm, H=henry.
History.
The term "farad" was originally coined by Latimer Clark and Charles Bright in 1861, in honor of Michael Faraday, for a unit of quantity of charge but, starting in 1881 at the International Congress of Electricians in Paris, the name farad was officially used for the unit of electrical capacitance.
Explanation.
A capacitor consists of two conducting surfaces, frequently referred to as plates, separated by an insulating layer usually referred to as a dielectric. The original capacitor was the Leyden jar developed in the 18th century. It is the accumulation of electric charge on the plates that results in capacitance. Modern capacitors are constructed using a range of manufacturing techniques and materials to provide the extraordinarily wide range of capacitance values used in electronics applications from femtofarads to farads, with maximum-voltage ratings ranging from a few volts to several kilovolts.
Values of capacitors are usually specified in farads (F), microfarads (μF), nanofarads (nF) and picofarads (pF). The millifarad is rarely used in practice (a capacitance of 4.7 mF (0.0047 F), for example, is instead written as ), while the nanofarad is uncommon in North America. The size of commercially available capacitors ranges from around 0.1 pF to (5 kF) supercapacitors. Parasitic capacitance in high-performance integrated circuits can be measured in femtofarads (1 fF = 0.001 pF =  F), while high-performance test equipment can detect changes in capacitance on the order of tens of attofarads (1 aF =  F).
A value of 0.1 pF is about the smallest available in capacitors for general use in electronic design, since smaller ones would be dominated by the parasitic capacitances of other components, wiring or printed circuit boards. Capacitance values of 1 pF or lower can be achieved by twisting two short lengths of insulated wire together.
The capacitance of the Earth's ionosphere with respect to the ground is calculated to be about 1 F.
Informal and deprecated terminology.
The picofarad is sometimes colloquially pronounced as "puff" or "pic", as in "a ten-puff capacitor". Similarly, "mic" (pronounced "mike") is sometimes used informally to signify microfarads. If the Greek letter μ is not available, the notation "uF" is often used as a substitute for "μF" in electronics literature. A "micro-microfarad" (μμF, and confusingly often mmf or MMF), an obsolete unit sometimes found in older texts, is the equivalent of a picofarad. In texts prior to 1960, and on capacitor packages even much more recently, mf or MFD rather than the modern µF frequently represented microfarads. Similarly, mmf represented picofarads.
Related concepts.
The reciprocal of capacitance is called electrical elastance, the (non-standard, non-SI) unit of which is the daraf.
CGS units.
The abfarad (abbreviated abF) is an obsolete CGS unit of capacitance equal to farads (1 gigafarad, GF).
The statfarad (abbreviated statF) is a rarely used CGS unit equivalent to the capacitance of a capacitor with a charge of 1 statcoulomb across a potential difference of 1 statvolt. It is 1/(10−5c2) farad, approximately 1.1126 picofarads.

</doc>
<doc id="82357" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82357" title="Angers">
Angers

Angers () is a city in western France, about southwest of Paris. It is chef-lieu of the Maine-et-Loire department and was, before the French Revolution, the capital of the province of Anjou. The inhabitants of both the city and the province are called "Angevins". The commune of Angers proper, without the metropolitan area, is the third most populous in northwestern France after Nantes and Rennes and the 17th in France.
Angers is the historical capital of Anjou and was for centuries an important stronghold in northwestern France. It is the cradle of the Plantagenet dynasty and was during the reign of René of Anjou one of the intellectual centers of Europe. Angers developed at the confluence of three rivers, the Mayenne, the Sarthe, and the Loir, all coming from the north and flowing south to the Loire. Their confluence, just north of Angers, creates the Maine, a short but wide river that flows into the Loire several kilometers south. The Angers metropolitan area is a major economic center in western France, particularly active in the industrial sector, horticulture, and business tourism.
Angers proper covers and has a population of 147,305 inhabitants, while around 394,700 live in its metropolitan area. The Angers Loire Métropole is made up of 33 communes covering with 287,000 inhabitants.
Angers enjoys a rich cultural life, made possible by its universities and museums. The old medieval center is still dominated by the massive château of the Plantagenêts, home of the "Apocalypse Tapestry", the biggest medieval tapestry ensemble in the World. Angers is also both at the edge of the Val de Loire, a World Heritage Site, and the Loire-Anjou-Touraine regional natural park.
Toponymy.
Etymology.
The city is first mentioned by Ptolemy around  150 in his "Geography". It was then known as Juliomagus (, "Iouliomagos"), a name by which it also appears in the Tabula Peutingeriana. The name is a compound of the Latin name Julius (probably in reference to Julius Caesar) and the Celtic "magos", "market". Similar town dedications were common in Roman Gaul, and toponyms often kept a Gallic element. When the location needed to be distinguished from other Juliomagi, it was known as Juliomagus Andecavorum ("Juliomagus of the Andecavi"), in reference to the principal Gallic tribe in and around the city.
Around  400, the city came to be referred to as the civitas Andecavorum ("tribal capital of the Andecavi"). This was a common change in Gaul, also seen in the names of Paris, Tours and Évreux around this time. During the Middle Ages, the late Latin name gradually developed into the modern one. It is successively mentioned as Andecava civitas (6th century), Andecavis ( 769), Andegavis (861  882), Angieus (in 1127) and Angeus (in 1205). The form Angiers appeared during the 12th century and was later corrupted to "Angers".
The Latin "Andecavum" gave also Anjou its name. This double formation is quite common in France and is also seen in "Poitiers" & "Poitou" and "Bourges" & "Berry".
Nicknames.
Angers was traditionally known as the "Black City" ("") from its slate roofs. As these have become less common since the development of the city in the 19th century, the city has also been known as:
Heraldry.
The coat of arms of Angers bears the French royal fleur de lys of the dukes of Anjou (the first duke was the son of the king of France, Jean II); the key evokes the stronghold position of the city close to the Breton border. An acrostic from the Middle Ages calls it "Antique clef de France", which means "Antique key to France":
Under Napoleon I's rule, Angers was one of the "Bonnes villes" and was therefore allowed to ask for a new coat of arms. The bees, symbol of the First French Empire, then replaced the royal fleurs de lys.
In 1949, Angers received the 1939–1945 War Cross and since then, the decoration is sometimes placed between the two fleurs de lys.
Angers also had several mottos through its history:
Geography.
Location.
Angers in located at the geographical center of the Maine-et-Loire department, on the road which connects Paris to the Atlantic ocean. The city is situated just south of the confluence of the Loir, Mayenne and Sarthe which form together the river Maine. The Maine crosses Angers and heads south towards the Loire. The confluence of the three rivers and the proximity of the Loire make up a natural crossroads which favoured the foundation of the antique "Juliomagus".
Angers is located from Nantes, from Rennes, from Poitiers and from Paris. It is also far from Pornic, the closest sea resort, situated on the Atlantic ocean.
Elevation varies above sea level. Angers is a hilly town, particularly marked by a rocky promontory dominating the lower valley of Anjou. This was the site of the ancient city and still houses the town's castle, cathedral, and medieval quarters.
At the north and south, where the river Maine arrives in and leaves Angers, the landscape is formed by islands, ponds and floodplains which are a haven for birds and a typical flora of the Val de Loire. The étang Saint-Nicolas and Lac de Maine, both artificial, are among the biggest green areas of the city.
Metropolitan area.
The commune of Angers is bordered by ten other communes which form various suburbs. These are, clockwise, Avrillé, Cantenay-Épinard, Écouflant, Saint-Barthélemy-d'Anjou, Trélazé, Les Ponts-de-Cé, Sainte-Gemmes-sur-Loire, Bouchemaine and Beaucouzé. 22 other communes situated farther form with them the agglomeration community of the Angers Loire Métropole. All these peripheral communes are situated within from Angers proper. Together, they have around 272,400 inhabitants.
Climate.
Angers enjoys a very mild climate because of its location between oceanic and continental climate. Winters are usually wet, with scarce frosts and snowfalls, and summers are warm and sunny.
Urban morphology.
The oldest streets and buildings in Angers are located on the promontory where the castle stands. The urban structure there dates back from the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries. A military presence there has been attested since the 3rd century and some remains of an antique city wall are still visible in the castle grounds This wall was built to protect the city from the Germanic invasions of  275 & 276.
The Castle was during the Middle Ages the core of the city defense system, composed of tall city walls and river chains to prevent enemy ships from going up the Maine. The walls were last reconstructed between 1230 and 1240, on an order of Louis IX of France. Today, portions of wall are still visible in Rue Toussaint and Boulevard Carnot, as well as some towers, like the "Tour Villebon" and the "Tour des Anglais".
Before the first cadastre (1810), the city had maintained much of its medieval limits: on and around the castle promontory, with some dwellings on the other bank of the Maine, a quarter called "La Doutre". That part of the city experienced a quick development during the industrial revolution and became a big river port. Industry was encouraged by firms like Bessonneau (textile factories) and Cointreau (distillery). After 1850, many suburbs appeared around the train stations and the farther slate quarries in Trélazé. Despite the port in La Doutre, demographic growth and urban extension were still more important on the eastern bank of the Maine, on which the ancient Juliomagus was founded.
The medieval city center was redeveloped and expanded from 1791. The "Place du Ralliement", the main square, was then built in place of three churches destroyed during the French Revolution and, later, ring boulevards planted with trees replaced the city walls. The architectural style used is mainly Haussmanian, but leaves sometimes room for Palladian, Art Nouveau or Art Deco buildings.
After 1945 and the Second World War, several large council estates made of tower blocks were built around the city center, the first of them being Belle-Beille in 1953. The industrial activities drastically changed; port activity declined whereas new factories, such as Technicolor SA in 1957, emerged. During the 1970s, the modernist approach on urban extension was replaced by a more individualistic point of view and more and more detached houses were built for the middle class. The metropolitan area kept enlarging, commuting became general and new shopping areas were constructed close to the former villages engulfed by the city. Because of the floodplains that surround the city north and south, Angers can only grow significantly on an east-west axis.
Green areas.
Being both at the edge of the Val de Loire World Heritage site and on the largest river confluence in France, Angers has a high natural potential, notably highlighted by the Saint-Aubin island, situated north of the center and covering a tenth of the city total surface. Protected, the island is formed of swamps and natural meadows.
The oldest green areas date back from the Renaissance, when the moats of the castle were transformed into pleasure and kitchen gardens. Similar gardens were built by the aristocracy around their hôtels particuliers and medicinal gardens were planted in hospices cloisters. The Jardin des plantes, the first botanical garden, dates back from the beginning of the 18th century. During the 19th century, others were built, for example the Faculty of Pharmacy garden and the Roseraie. The first recreational parks, for their part, were built during the Second French Empire. The étang Saint-Nicolas, made by a sluice on a small river, the Brionneau, was protected as early as 1936.
The Jardin du Mail ("Mall Garden"), an esplanade situated outside the ring boulevards, was built between 1820 and 1880 on the former Champs de Mars (Fields of Mars, a place where the garrisons used to train and parade). Another esplanade, the Mail François Mitterrand, was built in 1999 together with a garden inside the new Saint-Serge business district. During the 1960s the old gravel pits around the Maine were filled with water to form the Lac de Maine, which now hosts a marina. In 2010, a large amusement park, Terra Botanica, was inaugurated close to Saint-Aubin island.
History.
Prehistory and Antiquity.
The first sign of human presence in Angers dates back to around 400,000 . Vestiges from the Neolithic are more abundant and include numerous polished stone axes. Burials from 4500  3500  were also discovered in the actual castle grounds.
During the 5th century , the Andecavi, a Celtic people, settled north of the Loire. By the end of the Age of Iron, Angers was a relatively densely populated hillfort. The settlement's Roman name Juliomagus might be more ancient but is not attested before the 3rd century. The Roman town consisted of many villas and baths and had an amphitheater as well as a Mithraeum, a temple dedicated to Mithra.
Successive Germanic invasions in  275 and 276 forced the inhabitants to move to the highest point of their city and to build a wall around a small area of around .
Middle Ages.
Angers got its first bishop in 372 during the election of Martin of Tours. The first abbey, Saint-Aubin, was built during the 7th century to house the sarcophagus of Saint Albinius. Saint-Serge Abbey was founded by the Merovingian kings Clovis II and Theuderic III a century later. In 2008, ten Frankish sarcophagi from that period were discovered where Saint-Morille church once stood during the tramway construction.
From the 850s, Angers suffered from its situation on the border with Brittany and Normandy. In September 851, Charles the Bald and Erispoe, a Breton chief, met in the town to sign the Treaty of Angers, which secured Breton independence and fixed the borders of Brittany. However, the situation remained dangerous for Angers, and Charles the Bald created in 853 a wide buffer zone around Brittany comprising parts of Anjou, Touraine, Maine and Sées, which was ruled by Robert the Strong, a great-grandfather of Hugh Capet.
In 870, the Viking chief Hastein seized Angers where he settled until a successful siege temporarily displaced him. He again took control of the town in 873, before the Carolingian Emperor ousted him.
Fulk I of Anjou, a Carolingian descendant, was the first viscount of Angers (before 898 until 929) and of Tours (898-909), and count of Nantes (909-919). Around 929, he took the title of count (earl) of Angers and founded the first Anjou dynasty. Angers subsequently formed the capital of the province of Anjou.
During the 12th century, after internal divisions in Brittany, the county of Nantes was annexed by Anjou. Henry II Plantagenêt kept it for more than 30 years. At the same time, he also ruled the vast Angevin Empire, which stretched from the Pyrenees to Ireland. The castle of Angers was then the seat of the Court and the dynasty. The Empire disappeared in 1204–1205 when the King of France, Philip II, seized Normandy and Anjou. Henceforth there were no more counts of Anjou, as the French king had made Anjou a dukedom.
Now a part of the Kingdom of France, Angers became the "Key to the Kingdom" ("") facing still independent Brittany. In 1228, during Louis IX's minority, Blanche of Castile decided to fortify the city and to rebuild the castle. Later, during the 1350s and 1360s, the schools of Law, Medicine and Theology, renowned in Europe, were organized into a university. In 1373, Louis I of Naples and Anjou ordered the six tapestries illustrating the Apocalypse of St John known today as the "Apocalypse Tapestry".
Renaissance.
King René of Anjou contributed to the economic revival in a city that had been diminished by the Black Death (1347–1350) and the Hundred Years War (1337–1453). A man of great culture and generosity, René transformed Angers into a cultural and political center and held court there. He transformed the castle moat into a menagerie and built several gardens. He also founded in Angers a new Ordre du Croissant which was supposed to compete with the Order of the Golden Fleece, created several years earlier.
In 1474, Louis XI of France, in his attempt to conquer Anjou, came to Angers with his army, asking for the keys of the city. René, then 65 years old, did not want to lead a war against his nephew and surrendered his domains without a fight. Thus, Anjou ceased to be an appanage and fell into the Royal domain. After his death, René was buried in 1480 in Saint-Maurice cathedral.
In 1551, Angers became the seat of a bailiwick and the présidial of a jurisdiction, a position the city kept until 1790. At the same time, with the growth of Protestantism in France, a Catholic was placed at the head of the city and its castle while the bourgeoisie formed a Catholic militia to protect Angers from the Huguenots. The bishop, Gabriel Bouvery, organized on his side an "Angevin League".
When the news of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre arrived in Angers, a new massacre was organized in the city. The bodies of slain Protestants were thrown in the Mayenne. It is the aldermen who stopped the slaughter.
In 1598, the Edict of Nantes was prepared in Angers by Henri IV. From 6 March until 2 April, Angers was "de facto" the capital of France and the King tried by all means to satisfy the Catholics of the city, for example by laying the cornerstone of the new Couvent des Capucins.
Classical period.
In 1619, Louis XIII of France gave the governance of Anjou to his mother, Marie de' Medici. The Queen Mother settled in Angers, at the Logis Barrault, with her chaplain, Cardinal Richelieu.
At the premature death of Louis XIII in 1643, his son Louis XIV was only an infant. France was troubled at this time by several famines and epidemics and by political instability. In 1649, the people of Angers revolted against rising taxes, the start of the Fronde in Anjou. The Fronde was a nationwide military conflict opposing some aristocrats wanting more autonomy and the Royal forces loyal to Anne of Austria as Queen Mother and Regent, and her prime minister, Cardinal Mazarin. Royalist repression in Angers was narrowly averted by Bishop Henri Arnauld, who interceded with the Queen Mother. Arnauld, who would remain Bishop of Angers until 1692, was to leave a deep mark on the religious life of the city during the second half of the 17th century.
In 1652, Henri Chabot, Duke of Rohan and governor of Anjou, decided to back Louis of Condé, leader of the Fronde. Angers again became rebellious and Louis XIV sent his army to seize it. The Duke of Rohan immediately surrendered and thus again prevented the sack of the city.
French Revolution.
The first months of the French Revolution were relatively quiet in Angers. In 1789, the city lost its ancient administrative positions, replaced in 1790 by the department of "Mayenne-et-Loire", soon renamed "Maine-et-Loire". Anjou, as a political entity, disappeared, although the new department included most of its territory.
The War of Vendée, a Royalist rebellion and counterrevolution led in Vendée, a department located at the southwest of Maine-et-Loire, reached the Loire in March 1793. The Royalist army soon crossed the river and progressed as far as Granville, in Normandy, in November. Pushed back, the Vendéens went back south and, to cross the Loire again, had to attack Angers.
The city was defended by 4,000 Republican soldiers, whereas the Royalists were at least 20,000, but weakened by successive fights and deceases. The Siege of Angers occurred on 3 and 4 December 1793. The Royalists' bad tactics, as well as the strength of Angers city wall and castle, caused their loss. They consequently went back north for a while, around Le Mans, before crossing the Loire at Ancenis on 16 December.
In 1794, fierce repression was conducted in the whole region against the Royalists. In Angers, 290 prisoners were shot and 1020 died of illness in jail. The city also welcomed many refugees, mostly Republicans living in Royalist rural areas. Between 19 and 31 May 1793, between 650 and 1000 Republican families sought asylum in Angers.
Since 1800.
During the 19th century, the city was deeply influenced by the urban transformations in Paris. The city traditionally had a somewhat sombre appearance from the quantity of local slate used in construction but many quarters were gradually destroyed, redeveloped, or rebuilt on the Parisian model. The city wall, which formed a square around the old city core, was demolished around 1850 and replaced by wide boulevards. New districts of the city were also opened up on the opposite bank of the river.
In 1849, the Angers-Saumur railway was built; it was extended to Nantes two years later. When completed, the line connected Paris to the Atlantic coast.
In 1850, a catastrophic failure of the Basse-Chaîne suspension bridge caused the deaths of over 200 soldiers. The disaster inhibited the construction of suspension bridges in France for two decades. The accident was mainly caused by soldiers' lilting march which created resonance in the bridge structure.
In 1875, a "free faculty" was created. It was soon assimilated to the medieval Angevin University ('), which had been dissolved during the French Revolution. The new faculty was canonically erected as the Catholic University of Angers () by Pope Pius IX in 1879. However, in 1890, a law prohibited private institutions of higher education from calling themselves "universities". The institution was then renamed the "Free Faculty of Angers" ('), although it kept its original name on an informal basis. At the beginning of the 20th century, two higher education establishments, specializing in agriculture and commercial sciences, were opened.
During the first half of the 20th century, several Art Nouveau and Art Deco buildings were constructed, such as the "Nouvelles Galeries", the "Hotel des Postes", "Hotel Continental", the "Alcazar" and the "Maison bleue".
In September 1939, when Poland was invaded by Germany, the Polish government-in-exile settled in Angers. It left the city on 12 June 1940, after the invasion of France by the Wehrmacht. Angers fell to the Nazis during the same month. The Germans made it the seat of a regional Kommandantur. In 1941, a first Resistance movement, called "Honneur et Patrie", was created in Angers. 60 Resistants were shot at the Belle-Beille range in 1942 and a German bunker factory employed 6000 people in 1943. In July 1942, 853 Jews were arrested and sent to Auschwitz.
On the night of 28 May 1944, the first Allied bombing occurred over the Saint-Laud quarter. 243 people died and many others were wounded. Successive attacks on 29 and 30 May destroyed the train station and its surroundings which were reconstructed in the 1950s.
After liberating Avranches and Rennes, General Patton and his 5th infantry division arrived in Anjou on 5 August. To seize Angers, they decided to enter the city by its eastern side to surprise the Nazis. On 9 August, they crossed the Maine and started the fight. Helped by the local French Forces of the Interior, they progressively moved forward to the city center. The fight was nevertheless difficult and Angers was liberated the day after, at around 5 p.m.
After the end of the war, the city experienced quick development and demographic growth. In 1971, a decision was made to reestablish a public university, and the Université catholique d'Angers was split between the Université catholique de l'Ouest (private) and the Université d'Angers (public). Angers continues to have two different universities.
Until the 1980s, Angers experienced several massive urban development plans, such as the construction of the Lac de Maine, and several vast council estates and shopping malls, as well as the construction of a highway which crossed the city through its center, a project that forced the destruction of many old buildings and destroyed the original quays on the Maine. Later, other urban plans were drawn up, with a new emphasis on nature and heritage protection, as well as on social mixing. During the 1990s, the redevelopment of the Saint-Serge quarter, located just north of the historical center, produced a new business center, gardens and university buildings.
Administration.
Angers received its communal charter from Louis XI of France in February 1475, but free elections for the mayor and aldermen were not guaranteed before 1484, following a decision by Charles VIII. Since then, 75 successive mayors have governed Angers.
Angers was until the Second World War mainly governed by centrist and republican mayors. Since 1977, all the successive mayors have been members of the Socialist Party, whereas the Maine-et-Loire department has always been governed by moderate right-wing parties. Following Jean-Claude Antonini's resignation in 2012, the current mayor is Frédéric Béatse.
Angers is divided into eight cantons; most of them include parts of Angers plus some surrounding communes. These cantons are not administrative entities and only serve to elect the members of the department council. The INSEE, the French institute for statistics, divides the commune of Angers into twelve sectors. Depending on their social and economic issues, some of them can have priority for financial assistance and urban regeneration. In Angers, five are considered as priority sectors, three as sensitive urban areas, and one as an urban free zone.
Being the chef-lieu of Maine-et-Loire, Angers is the seat of a prefecture. It is also the seat of an appeal court and of several regional or local institutes, concerning for example, customs, education or science. Angers also has several other courts of justice as well as a prison.
Demographics.
In 2009, Angers had 147,305 inhabitants, 0.3% less than ten years before. It is the 18th most populated commune in France, having reached its maximum population in 2006, with 152,337 inhabitants. Censuses have been conducted since 1793.
In 2009, the urban area, which encompasses Angers plus nine surrounding communes ( in total), had 215,132 inhabitants. The metropolitan area included in 2009 133 communes, 394,710 inhabitants and . The Angers Loire Métropole, an economic and political association of communes, includes 33 communes and around 272,000 inhabitants.
The population of Angers is relatively young, with 48% of the population being younger than 30 and the proportion of residents over 60 years old (18.9%) being lower than both the national (22.1%) and departmental (21.4%) rates. This is partially explained by the presence of two universities, 21.3% of the population being pupils and students in 2009.
Economy.
The early prosperity of the town was largely due to the nearby quarries of slate, whose abundant use for the roofs of Angers led to its sobriquet as the "Black City". In the mid-19th century, the principal manufactures were goods for sailing ships (sailcloth and rope), linen and hose, sugar, leather, wax, and oil, as well as agricultural products (mainly wheat, wine, and fruit). By the time of the First World War, Cointreau had developed the distillation of liqueurs from the area's fruit to an industrial level. The work for sailing ships was still carried on but steamships had greatly reduced demand. Instead, local companies produced cables, wires, and thread and increased production of footwear, umbrellas, and parasols. The area's vinyards focused on sparkling wine and fruit was increasingly preserved for sale elsewhere. The area had also developed a small-scale textile industry and begun producing machines, as well as commercial-scale production of hemp and flowers.
Present-day Angers provides 45.7% of the Maine-et-Loire job positions. It is the 22nd-largest national job provider and the 3rd-largest one in northwestern France after Nantes and Rennes. Its unemployment rate (9.9% in 2009) is close to the national rate. 21.4% of the people working in Angers have graduate or post-graduate qualifications.
Cointreau continues to produce its orange triple-sec liqueur in nearby Saint-Barthélemy-d'Anjou, but many of the other industries have since vanished. Modern Angers produces Scania trucks at Ecouflant and computers by Bull, Packard Bell, and NEC. It also supports research labs investigating horticulture and biotechnology. Thanks to its several higher education schools, laboratories, and various offices, Angers is the largest horticultural center in Europe and, as the home of the Community Plant Variety Office, Angers is the hub of the plant breeders' rights system in the European Community. For example, Angers is the leading hydrangeas producer in Europe. The local economy also relies on the presence of many administrative, educational, and health institutions. There are also many small firms, chiefly focused on the agricultural tradition of Maine-et-Loire. Angers also serves as a regional financial center, with many banks and insurance companies (including Afone, CNP Assurances, Crédit agricole, Fiducial, and Groupama) maintaining their regional offices there.
Angers is an important convention center, with a present convention trade of around €8,000,000. The new convention center slated for 2016 has been cancelled in 2013. The "Parc des Expositions", where fairs are currently held, welcomes 600,000 visitors and more than 300 events each year. With its , it is the biggest structure of its type in northwestern France.
Health and education.
The "Hôtel-Dieu", founded in the 12th century, is one of the oldest hospitals in France. First located in the "Hospice Saint-Jean", it moved into new buildings in 1870; it became Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) in 1966. It has 1,500 beds and around 5,500 people work there. Two private hospitals and a regional center for reëducation also exist.
A center of learning, Angers boasts two renowned universities and several specialized institutions, altogether enrolling more than 26,000 students. The Catholic University of the West (' or UCO) is one of five Catholic universities in France. UCO is best known for its International Center for the Study of the French Language (' or CIDEF), which provides college students from around the world with college-level course instruction in the French language, and for its Institute for the Development of Consulting and Business ("" or IDCE), an important business school which offers undergraduate and graduate (MBA) degrees in International Business and Consulting. The town is also home to a state university, the University of Angers, best university in France in 2015 for success rates.
Angers is also home to engineering graduate schools, such as the Arts et Métiers ParisTech, top school in mechanical and industrial engineering and the ESEO, an engineering school in electronics and computer science. Its education and research institutes are the driving force behind the city's science and technology industries.
Angers's other educational institutions include lycées, training colleges and a school of fine art.
Another Angers's Business School is ESSCA (""). Formerly part of the UCO, the school's Master's program is of a duration of five years. ESSCA recruits students after the Baccalaureat.
In addition to French schools and universities, an American university, St. Edward's University, has a new expanding campus in Angers. St. Edward’s University is a diverse, Catholic liberal arts institution from Austin, Texas. The university has a partnership with UCO, and offers a variety of courses of undergraduate level and professional training.
Transport.
Angers is situated on the crossroads of three highways, the A11, to Paris and Nantes, the A87 to La Roche-sur-Yon and the A85 to Tours and Lyon. National roads connect the city with Rennes, Caen and Laval.
Before the construction of bypasses during the 2000s, the A11 crossed the city center, following the river Maine, and passed just below the castle. Causing air pollution and noise and disfiguring the Maine quays, the portions of the former highway which are still in place should be redeveloped in the coming years.
Angers inaugurated a new tram system on 25 June 2011. The tramway consists of one line with 25 stops. The line runs from Avrillé-Ardenne in the north to Angers-Roseraie in the south, passing by the center and the train station. Service is provided by Keolis using 17 Alstom Citadis trams. The system uses partial ground-level power supply, which avoids aerial wires and preserves the historical character of the city center. A second line is scheduled for 2018-2022. The public transportation company, Irigo, which operates the tram, also organizes the bus network consisting of 13 urban lines and 12 suburban lines.
The bus station, situated outside the Angers Saint-Laud train station, is a hub for the departmental bus network ("Anjoubus") and is also served by international bus companies.
Angers is on both the Nantes-Paris and Nantes-Lyon railways. The city has several train stations, all originally built in the 19th century. Some are still in use; others are closed or reserved for freight. The main station, Angers Saint-Laud, is on a TGV line and has a direct TGV service to Paris (1 hour 30 minutes), Lyon (3 hours 45 minutes), Strasbourg (4 hours 35 minutes), and Lille (3 hours 25 minutes), as well as Avignon, Marseilles and Montpellier. Regional trains go to Cholet, Saumur, Tours, Blois, Nevers and Bourges.
The nearest airport is Angers - Loire Airport, which replaced in 1998 an older airport near the Saint-Aubin island. The Angers—Loire Airport is located in the commune of Marcé, from Angers and close to the A11 and the A85. It can receive 50,000 passengers per year.
Culture.
Main sights.
The Château d'Angers, built on a schist promontory, dominates the river Maine and the old town. Its site has been occupied since antiquity; the castle itself was built between 1230 and 1240 by Louis IX of France. The massive walls are about one kilometer long and punctuated by 17 towers; they were built with horizontal slices of tuff and schist, giving it strength and an original striped look. During the 15th century, a chapel and the Châtelet were added in the courtyard.
The "Maison d'Adam" ("Adam's House"), located behind the cathedral, is an excellent example of the half-timbered houses which were built during the Middle Ages. Many similar houses, although smaller, are also visible along the streets around the castle. The city also displays several Renaissance and classical hôtels particuliers, the most renowned being the "Logis Pincé" from the 16th century. The "Maison bleue" ("Blue House"), built in 1927, is an Art Deco masterpiece. The former seat of the French Aviation Company ("") was built in 1938 and abandoned during the Second World War. Totally refurbished in 2004, it is now a testimony to 1930s architecture.
The Saint-Maurice cathedral is a major landmark in the cityscape, with its two spires culminating at . The construction of the current building started during the 12th century on the remains of an older sanctuary. The original structure, romanesque, received gothic columns and vaults in the middle of the 12th century, giving birth to the Angevin gothic, a style that quickly spread in Western France and the Angevin possessions in Italy. Sculptures and architectural details were added to the façade during the 16th century. The twin spires were built in 1518 and 1523. The neighbouring "Palais du Tau", the former episcopal palace, dates from the 12th century.
The skyline is also marked by the "Tour Saint-Aubin". Completed in 1170, it was the bell-tower of an abbey closed during the French Revolution and destroyed in 1810. Elaborately sculptured 11th and 12th century arcades also survive in the courtyard of the Prefecture. Another abbey, the "Abbaye Toussaint", founded during the 13th century, was also partially pulled down and only the church and parts of the cloister are still visible. On the southern limits of the commune, close to the Maine, stands the "Couvent de la Baumette", founded during the 15th century by René of Anjou.
La Doutre, an old quarter located on the western bank of the Maine and facing the castle, contains two major medieval sites, the former "Abbaye du Ronceray", built during the 11th and 12th century, and the "Hôpital Saint-Jean", founded by Henry II of England and used as the city hospital until 1870.
Museums.
The Musée des Beaux-Arts d'Angers, located in the Renaissance "Logis Barrault", displays a collection of paintings and sculptures dating from the 14th century to today. It is particularly renowned for its 18th-century paintings, including works by Jean-Baptiste Greuze, Van Loo, Antoine Watteau, Jean-Honoré Fragonard, and Jean Siméon Chardin. The museum also contains a graphic design studio, a gallery devoted to the history of Angers and a temporary exhibition gallery. The institution has an antenna at the château in Villevêque, a village located several kilometers north of the city.
Inside the castle, a special gallery displays the Apocalypse Tapestry, ordered by Louis I of Naples at the end of the 14th century. It is more than long, the largest medieval tapestry in the world. Inspired by manuscript miniatures, the successive scenes, designed by Jean Bondol, illustrate the Apocalypse of St John.
Located inside the old "Hôpital Saint-Jean", the "Musée Jean-Lurçat et de la tapisserie contemporaine" displays tapestries dating from the 19th and 20th centuries. The museum is dedicated to Jean Lurçat, an artist noted for his role in the revival of contemporary tapestry, and notably exhibits his ""Chant du Monde"", a modern echo to the "Apocalypse Tapestry" made after the bombing of Hiroshima.
The Muséum d'histoire naturelle d’Angers has been located in the 1521 Hôtel Demarie-Valentin since 1885. It exhibits a large collection of mounted animals and fossils, divided in three departments, one for zoology, one for botany and the last one for paleontology and geology.
The "Logis Pincé", constructed during the Renaissance, is the home of the museum of the same name. It displays Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Etruscan antiquities as well as Chinese and Japanese artifacts.
Located in the "Abbaye Toussaint", the "Galerie David d'Angers" gathers sculptures, reliefs, and medallions by David d'Angers, a 19th-century sculptor born in the city. The gallery owns as well the preparatory works for the Panthéon of Paris pediment.
Angers also enjoys a "Maison de l'Architecture", which organizes various exhibitions and workshops, as well as several temporary exhibition galleries distributed in the city center. Outside the commune limits are also an aviation museum and a museum of communications.
Entertainment and performing arts.
The "Grand Théâtre", dominating the Place du Ralliement, was first built in 1791, but destroyed by a fire in 1853. The existing building was completed in 1871 and its auditorium contains six stalls and four balconies, totaling 730 seats. The "Théâtre du Quai", inaugurated in 2007, has two auditoriums; one contains 980 seats and several balconies, and the other, more flexible, can welcome 400 seated or 960 standing spectators. The Grand Théâtre and the Théâtre du Quai are the venues of three institutions, "Angers-Nantes Opéra", an opera company also based in Nantes, the Contemporary Dance National Center (CNDC), inaugurated by Alwin Nikolais in 1978, and the "Nouveau théâtre d'Angers" (NTA).
The Orchestre National des Pays de la Loire, shared with Nantes, usually performs at the Congress Center, built in 1983, with a capacity of 1,240 seats. Other concert halls include the "Chabada", the "Amphitéa" and the former Ursuline chapel. Local theater companies perform at "Théâtre Chanzy", "Théâtre du Champ de Bataille", "Théâtre de la Comédie" or at the "Centre Jean Vilar". Each September, the city organizes a street performance festival, called the "Accroche-Cœurs".
The "Chabada", a popular concert hall, is the cradle of the Angevin contemporary scene and several groups and performers were discovered there, Les Thugs, a punk band formed in 1983, being the first ones. The local scene also includes the alternative rock group La Ruda, the power pop band Pony Pony Run Run, the world music band Lo'Jo and Titi Robin, a performer influenced by Gypsy and Arabic music.
The Premiers Plans festival, dedicated to European first films and meant to help new directors meet their audience, is conducted every year and lasts one week. The films are screened in three small cinemas, while two big generalist multiplexes also exist in Angers.
Media.
Angers had a local TV channel "Angers 7" which went bankrupt in 2010 and was replaced 3 years later by "Angers Télé". The national French channel France 3, however, still presents local news in its programs. Several national radio stations, such as Virgin Radio, NRJ and Chérie FM maintain local antennas in Angers. The city is also the home of two local stations, "Radio Campus" and "Radio G !". Ouest-France and Le Courrier de l'Ouest are the two local newspapers, the last one having its headquarters in Angers. The city and Angers Loire Métropole also edit their news bulletins.
Sport.
Angers has many sport teams playing at top levels. Angers SCO is Angers's football team. The club was created in 1919 and returned to Ligue 1 (French top league) in 2015 after 21 years. Les Ducs d'Angers is Angers's ice hockey team. The club plays in the Magnus League (first division). Anjou BC is Angers's basketball team, playing in second division. Angers also acts as home to the Angers Aviron Nautique, a rowing club which actively competes in regattas across France.
Jean-Bouin Stadium is the main sports venue which can hold 18,000 people. The city also has a variety of sports halls, tennis courts, swimming pools, shooting and archery stands, a velodrome, a rowing center, an ice rink and a fencing hall. The Lac de Maine Stadium hosted the athletics championships in France in July 2009.
Twin cities.
Angers is twinned with:

</doc>
<doc id="82359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82359" title="Least squares">
Least squares

The method of least squares is a standard approach in regression analysis to the approximate solution of overdetermined systems, i.e., sets of equations in which there are more equations than unknowns. "Least squares" means that the overall solution minimizes the sum of the squares of the errors made in the results of every single equation.
The most important application is in data fitting. The best fit in the least-squares sense minimizes the sum of squared residuals, a residual being the difference between an observed value and the fitted value provided by a model. When the problem has substantial uncertainties in the independent variable (the "x" variable), then simple regression and least squares methods have problems; in such cases, the methodology required for fitting errors-in-variables models may be considered instead of that for least squares.
Least squares problems fall into two categories: linear or ordinary least squares and non-linear least squares, depending on whether or not the residuals are linear in all unknowns. The linear least-squares problem occurs in statistical regression analysis; it has a closed-form solution. The non-linear problem is usually solved by iterative refinement; at each iteration the system is approximated by a linear one, and thus the core calculation is similar in both cases.
Polynomial least squares describes the variance in a prediction of the dependent variable as a function of the independent variable and the deviations from the fitted curve.
When the observations come from an exponential family and mild conditions are satisfied, least-squares estimates and maximum-likelihood estimates are identical. The method of least squares can also be derived as a method of moments estimator.
The following discussion is mostly presented in terms of linear functions but the use of least-squares is valid and practical for more general families of functions. Also, by iteratively applying local quadratic approximation to the likelihood (through the Fisher information), the least-squares method may be used to fit a generalized linear model.
For the topic of approximating a function by a sum of others using an objective function based on squared distances, see least squares (function approximation).
The least-squares method is usually credited to Carl Friedrich Gauss (1795), but it was first published by Adrien-Marie Legendre.
History.
Context.
The method of least squares grew out of the fields of astronomy and geodesy as scientists and mathematicians sought to provide solutions to the challenges of navigating the Earth's oceans during the Age of Exploration. The accurate description of the behavior of celestial bodies was the key to enabling ships to sail in open seas, where sailors could no longer rely on land sightings for navigation.
The method was the culmination of several advances that took place during the course of the eighteenth century:
The method.
The first clear and concise exposition of the method of least squares was published by Legendre in 1805. The technique is described as an algebraic procedure for fitting linear equations to data and Legendre demonstrates the new method by analyzing the same data as Laplace for the shape of the earth. The value of Legendre's method of least squares was immediately recognized by leading astronomers and geodesists of the time.
In 1809 Carl Friedrich Gauss published his method of calculating the orbits of celestial bodies. In that work he claimed to have been in possession of the method of least squares since 1795. This naturally led to a priority dispute with Legendre. However, to Gauss's credit, he went beyond Legendre and succeeded in connecting the method of least squares with the principles of probability and to the normal distribution. He had managed to complete Laplace's program of specifying a mathematical form of the probability density for the observations, depending on a finite number of unknown parameters, and define a method of estimation that minimizes the error of estimation. Gauss showed that arithmetic mean is indeed the best estimate of the location parameter by changing both the probability density and the method of estimation. He then turned the problem around by asking what form the density should have and what method of estimation should be used to get the arithmetic mean as estimate of the location parameter. In this attempt, he invented the normal distribution.
An early demonstration of the strength of Gauss' Method came when it was used to predict the future location of the newly discovered asteroid Ceres. On 1 January 1801, the Italian astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi discovered Ceres and was able to track its path for 40 days before it was lost in the glare of the sun. Based on these data, astronomers desired to determine the location of Ceres after it emerged from behind the sun without solving Kepler's complicated nonlinear equations of planetary motion. The only predictions that successfully allowed Hungarian astronomer Franz Xaver von Zach to relocate Ceres were those performed by the 24-year-old Gauss using least-squares analysis.
In 1810, after reading Gauss's work, Laplace, after proving the central limit theorem, used it to give a large sample justification for the method of least square and the normal distribution. In 1822, Gauss was able to state that the least-squares approach to regression analysis is optimal in the sense that in a linear model where the errors have a mean of zero, are uncorrelated, and have equal variances, the best linear unbiased estimator of the coefficients is the least-squares estimator. This result is known as the Gauss–Markov theorem.
The idea of least-squares analysis was also independently formulated by the American Robert Adrain in 1808. In the next two centuries workers in the theory of errors and in statistics found many different ways of implementing least squares.
Problem statement.
The objective consists of adjusting the parameters of a model function to best fit a data set. A simple data set consists of "n" points (data pairs) formula_1, "i" = 1, ..., "n", where formula_2 is an independent variable and formula_3 is a dependent variable whose value is found by observation. The model function has the form formula_4, where "m" adjustable parameters are held in the vector formula_5. The goal is to find the parameter values for the model which "best" fits the data. The least squares method finds its optimum when the sum, "S", of squared residuals
is a minimum. A residual is defined as the difference between the actual value of the dependent variable and the value predicted by the model.
An example of a model is that of the straight line in two dimensions. Denoting the y-intercept as formula_8 and the slope as formula_9, the model function is given by formula_10. See linear least squares for a fully worked out example of this model.
A data point may consist of more than one independent variable. For example, when fitting a plane to a set of height measurements, the plane is a function of two independent variables, "x" and "z", say. In the most general case there may be one or more independent variables and one or more dependent variables at each data point. 
Limitations.
This regression formulation considers only residuals in the dependent variable. There are two rather different contexts in which different implications apply:
Solving the least squares problem.
The minimum of the sum of squares is found by setting the gradient to zero. Since the model contains "m" parameters, there are "m" gradient equations:
and since formula_12, the gradient equations become
The gradient equations apply to all least squares problems. Each particular problem requires particular expressions for the model and its partial derivatives.
Linear least squares.
A regression model is a linear one when the model comprises a linear combination of the parameters, i.e.,
where the function formula_15 is a function of formula_16.
Letting
we can then see that in that case the least square estimate (or estimator, in the context of a random sample), formula_18 is given by
For a derivation of this estimate see Linear least squares (mathematics).
Non-linear least squares.
There is no closed-form solution to a non-linear least squares problem. Instead, numerical algorithms are used to find the value of the parameters formula_20 that minimizes the objective. Most algorithms involve choosing initial values for the parameters. Then, the parameters are refined iteratively, that is, the values are obtained by successive approximation:
where "k" is an iteration number, and the vector of increments formula_22 is called the shift vector. In some commonly used algorithms, at each iteration the model may be linearized by approximation to a first-order Taylor series expansion about formula_23:
The Jacobian J is a function of constants, the independent variable "and" the parameters, so it changes from one iteration to the next. The residuals are given by
To minimize the sum of squares of formula_26, the gradient equation is set to zero and solved for formula_27:
which, on rearrangement, become "m" simultaneous linear equations, the normal equations:
The normal equations are written in matrix notation as
These are the defining equations of the Gauss–Newton algorithm.
Differences between linear and nonlinear least squares.
These differences must be considered whenever the solution to a nonlinear least squares problem is being sought.
Least squares, regression analysis and statistics.
The method of least squares is often used to generate estimators and other statistics in regression analysis.
Consider a simple example drawn from physics. A spring should obey Hooke's law which states that the extension of a spring is proportional to the force, "F", applied to it.
constitutes the model, where "F" is the independent variable. To estimate the force constant, "k", a series of "n" measurements with different forces will produce a set of data, formula_35, where "yi" is a measured spring extension. Each experimental observation will contain some error. If we denote this error formula_36, we may specify an empirical model for our observations,
There are many methods we might use to estimate the unknown parameter "k". Noting that the "n" equations in the "m" variables in our data comprise an overdetermined system with one unknown and "n" equations, we may choose to estimate "k" using least squares. The sum of squares to be minimized is
The least squares estimate of the force constant, "k", is given by
Here it is assumed that application of the force causes the spring to expand and, having derived the force constant by least squares fitting, the extension can be predicted from Hooke's law.
In regression analysis the researcher specifies an empirical model. For example, a very common model is the straight line model which is used to test if there is a linear relationship between dependent and independent variable. If a linear relationship is found to exist, the variables are said to be correlated. However, correlation does not prove causation, as both variables may be correlated with other, hidden, variables, or the dependent variable may "reverse" cause the independent variables, or the variables may be otherwise spuriously correlated. For example, suppose there is a correlation between deaths by drowning and the volume of ice cream sales at a particular beach. Yet, both the number of people going swimming and the volume of ice cream sales increase as the weather gets hotter, and presumably the number of deaths by drowning is correlated with the number of people going swimming. Perhaps an increase in swimmers causes both the other variables to increase.
In order to make statistical tests on the results it is necessary to make assumptions about the nature of the experimental errors. A common (but not necessary) assumption is that the errors belong to a normal distribution. The central limit theorem supports the idea that this is a good approximation in many cases.
However, if the errors are not normally distributed, a central limit theorem often nonetheless implies that the parameter estimates will be approximately normally distributed so long as the sample is reasonably large. For this reason, given the important property that the error mean is independent of the independent variables, the distribution of the error term is not an important issue in regression analysis. Specifically, it is not typically important whether the error term follows a normal distribution.
In a least squares calculation with unit weights, or in linear regression, the variance on the "j"th parameter,
denoted formula_40, is usually estimated with
where the true residual variance σ2 is replaced by an estimate based on the minimised value of the sum of squares objective function "S". The denominator, "n" − "m", is the statistical degrees of freedom; see effective degrees of freedom for generalizations.
Confidence limits can be found if the probability distribution of the parameters is known, or an asymptotic approximation is made, or assumed. Likewise statistical tests on the residuals can be made if the probability distribution of the residuals is known or assumed. The probability distribution of any linear combination of the dependent variables can be derived if the probability distribution of experimental errors is known or assumed. Inference is particularly straightforward if the errors are assumed to follow a normal distribution, which implies that the parameter estimates and residuals will also be normally distributed conditional on the values of the independent variables.
Weighted least squares.
A special case of generalized least squares called weighted least squares occurs when all the off-diagonal entries of "Ω" (the correlation matrix of the residuals) are null; the variances of the observations (along the covariance matrix diagonal) may still be unequal (heteroscedasticity).
The expressions given above are based on the implicit assumption that the errors are uncorrelated with each other and with the independent variables and have equal variance. The Gauss–Markov theorem shows that, when this is so, formula_42 is a best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE). If, however, the measurements are uncorrelated but have different uncertainties, a modified approach might be adopted. Aitken showed that when a weighted sum of squared residuals is minimized, formula_42 is the BLUE if each weight is equal to the reciprocal of the variance of the measurement
If the errors are correlated, the resulting estimator is the BLUE if the weight matrix is equal to the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the observations.
When the errors are uncorrelated, it is convenient to simplify the calculations to factor the weight matrix as formula_45.
The normal equations can then be written
in the same form as ordinary least squares:
where we define the following scaled matrix and vector:
For non-linear least squares systems a similar argument shows that the normal equations should be modified as follows.
Note that for empirical tests, the appropriate W is not known for sure and must be
estimated. For this feasible generalized least squares (FGLS) techniques may be used.
Relationship to principal components.
The first principal component about the mean of a set of points can be represented by that line which most closely approaches the data points (as measured by squared distance of closest approach, i.e. perpendicular to the line). In contrast, linear least squares tries to minimize the distance in the formula_49 direction only. Thus, although the two use a similar error metric, linear least squares is a method that treats one dimension of the data preferentially, while PCA treats all dimensions equally.
Regularized versions.
Tikhonov regularization.
In some contexts a regularized version of the least squares solution may be preferable. Tikhonov regularization (or ridge regression) adds a constraint that formula_50, the L2-norm of the parameter vector, is not greater than a given value. Equivalently, it may solve an unconstrained minimization of the least-squares penalty with formula_51 added, where formula_52 is a constant (this is the Lagrangian form of the constrained problem). In a Bayesian context, this is equivalent to placing a zero-mean normally distributed prior on the parameter vector.
Lasso method.
An alternative regularized version of least squares is "Lasso" (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator), which uses the constraint that formula_53, the L1-norm of the parameter vector, is no greater than a given value. (As above, this is equivalent to an unconstrained minimization of the least-squares penalty with formula_54 added.) In a Bayesian context, this is equivalent to placing a zero-mean Laplace prior distribution on the parameter vector. The optimization problem may be solved using quadratic programming or more general convex optimization methods, as well as by specific algorithms such as the least angle regression algorithm.
One of the prime differences between Lasso and ridge regression is that in ridge regression, as the penalty is increased, all parameters are reduced while still remaining non-zero, while in Lasso, increasing the penalty will cause more and more of the parameters to be driven to zero. This is an advantage of Lasso over ridge regression, as driving parameters to zero deselects the features from the regression. Thus, Lasso automatically selects more relevant features and discards the others, whereas Ridge regression never fully discards any features. Some feature selection techniques are developed based on the LASSO including Bolasso which bootstraps samples, and FeaLect which analyzes the regression coefficients corresponding to different values of formula_52 to score all the features.
The L1-regularized formulation is useful in some contexts due to its tendency to prefer solutions with fewer nonzero parameter values, effectively reducing the number of variables upon which the given solution is dependent. For this reason, the Lasso and its variants are fundamental to the field of compressed sensing. An extension of this approach is elastic net regularization.

</doc>
<doc id="82360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82360" title="Merneferre Ay">
Merneferre Ay

Merneferre Ay (also spelled Aya or Eje) was an ancient Egyptian pharaoh of the mid 13th Dynasty. The longest reigning pharaoh of the 13th Dynasty, he ruled a fragmented Egypt for over 23 years in the early to mid 17th century BC. A pyramidion bearing his name shows that he possibly completed a pyramid, probably located in the necropolis of Memphis.
Merneferre Ay is the last pharaoh of the 13th dynasty to be attested outside Upper Egypt and in spite of his long reign the number of artefacts attributable to him is comparatively small. This may point to problems in Egypt at the time and indeed, by the end of his reign, "the administration the Egyptian state seems to have completely collapsed". It is possible that the capital of Egypt since the early Middle Kingdom, Itjtawy was abandoned during or shortly after Ay's reign. For this reason, some scholars consider Merneferre Ay to be the last pharaoh of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt.
__FORCETOC__
Chronology.
Chronological position.
The relative chronological position of Merneferre Ay as a king of the mid 13th Dynasty is well established by the Turin canon, a king list redacted during the early Ramesside period (1292–1069 BC) and which serves as the primary historical source for the Second Intermediate Period. The king list records Ay's name on column 8 line 3 (column 6 line 3 in Alan Gardiner's reading of the Turin canon and entry 7.3 in von Beckerath's reading) and establishes that Merneferre Ay was preceded by Wahibre Ibiau and succeeded by Merhotepre Ini, who was possibly his son.
The precise chronological placement of Merneferre Ay varies between scholars, with Jürgen von Beckerath and Aidan Dodson seeing him as the 27th king of the dynasty while Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker place him in the 32nd and 33rd positions, respectively. Similarly the absolute datation of Ay's reign is debated and varies by 17 years between Ryholt's 1701–1677 BC and Schneider's 1684–1661 BC.
Reign length.
Until recently, the duration of Merneferre Ay's reign, which is recorded in the Turin canon, was disputed by Jürgen von Beckerath who read the damaged figure on the papyrus fragment as 13 years while both Alan Gardiner and Kenneth Kitchen maintained it should be read as 23 years.
Ryholt insists that "the tick that distinguishes 20 and 30 from 10 is preserved and beyond dispute. Accordingly, 23 years or, less likely, 33 years must be read." This makes Merneferre Ay the longest-ruling pharaoh of the 13th Dynasty at a time when numerous short-lived kings ruled Egypt.
Reign and Attestations.
As a king of the mid 13th Dynasty, Merneferre Ay reigned over Middle and Upper Egypt concurrently with the 14th Dynasty, which controlled at least the Eastern Nile Delta. The egyptologists Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker contend that Mernferre usurped the throne at the expense of his predecessor Wahibre Ibiau. They base this conclusion on the total absence of filiative nomina, that is references to the name of his father on the artefacts attributable to him. They believe that this should have been the case had his father been a pharaoh and indeed a number of 13th Dynasty kings used filiative nomina. Little is known of Ay's consorts, he was possibly married to Ineni whose scarabs are stylistically similar to those of Ay.
Attestations.
Merneferre Ay is well attested and no less than 62 scarab seals and one cylinder-seal Among the scarabs of known provenance, three are from Lower Egypt, more precisely one from Bubastis and two from Heliopolis. The rest of the scarabs of known provenance are from Abydos, Coptos and Lisht, all localities being in Middle or Upper Egypt. Other attestations of Ay include an obsidian globular jar now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, an inscribed limestone block, part of a lintel, discovered in 1908 by Georges Legrain in Karnak and a "pyramidion".
The "pyramidion" was confiscated from robbers by the Egyptian police in 1911 at Faqus, close to the ancient city of Avaris. It is carved with the name of Ay and shows him offering to Horus "Lord of heaven", demonstrating that a pyramid was built for him during his long reign. The fact that the pyramidion was probably discovered by the robbers in modern-day Khatana, part of the ancient city of Avaris (modern-day Qantir) is important since it was likely the capital of the 14th Dynasty during Ay's lifetime. Egyptologists believe that the pyramidion originates in fact from Memphis, in the necropolis of which Ay's pyramid must be located. Accordingly, this suggests that the pyramid was looted at the time of the Hyksos invasion c. 1650 BC and the pyramidion taken to Avaris at this moment. This is vindicated by the "damaged text on the pyramidion originally invoked four gods" two of whom were Ptah and Re-Horus (for Ra-Horakhty). The cults of these gods were based in the Memphite necropolis, not in Avaris. Other objects which suffered the same fate include two colossal statues of the 13th Dynasty king Imyremeshaw.
Legacy.
Even though Merneferre Ay is well attested, the number of objects attributable to him is relatively small given his nearly 24 year-long reign. This may point to serious problems in Egypt at the time and indeed Ryholt and others believe that by the end of Ay's reign "the administration the Egyptian state seems to have completely collapsed".
Merneferre Ay is the last Egyptian king of the 13th Dynasty who is attested by objects from outside of Upper Egypt. This may indicate the abandonment of the old capital of the Middle Kingdom Itjtawy in favor of Thebes. Daphna Ben Tor believes that this event was triggered by the invasion of the eastern Delta and the Memphite region by Canaanite rulers and indeed some egyptologists believe that by the end of Ay's reign the 13th dynasty had lost control of Lower Egypt including the Delta region and possibly Memphis itself. For these authors, this marks the end of the Middle Kingdom and the beginning of the Second Intermediate Period. This analysis is rejected by Ryholt and Baker however, who note that the stele of Seheqenre Sankhptahi, reigning toward the very end of the 13th Dynasty, strongly suggests that he reigned over Memphis. Unfortunately, the stele is of unknown provenance.
Ay.
Merneferre Ay is sometimes confused with Ay, a ruler at the end of the 18th Dynasty (1549–1292 BC). However, both kings ruled in completely different dynasties and have nothing in common other than a similar name.

</doc>
<doc id="82361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82361" title="Gram–Schmidt process">
Gram–Schmidt process

In mathematics, particularly linear algebra and numerical analysis, the Gram–Schmidt process is a method for orthonormalising a set of vectors in an inner product space, most commonly the Euclidean space R"n" equipped with the standard inner product. The Gram–Schmidt process takes a finite, linearly independent set "S" = {"v"1, ..., "v""k"} for and generates an orthogonal set that spans the same "k"-dimensional subspace of R"n" as "S".
The method is named after Jørgen Pedersen Gram and Erhard Schmidt but it appeared earlier in the work of Laplace and Cauchy. In the theory of Lie group decompositions it is generalized by the Iwasawa decomposition.
The application of the Gram–Schmidt process to the column vectors of a full column rank matrix yields the QR decomposition (it is decomposed into an orthogonal and a triangular matrix).
The Gram–Schmidt process.
We define the projection operator by
where formula_2 denotes the inner product of the vectors v and u. This operator projects the vector v orthogonally onto the line spanned by vector u. If u=0, we define formula_3. i.e., the projection map formula_4 is the zero map, sending every vector to the zero vector.
The Gram–Schmidt process then works as follows:
The sequence u1, ..., u"k" is the required system of orthogonal vectors, and the normalized vectors e1, ..., e"k" form an ortho"normal" set. The calculation of the sequence u1, ..., u"k" is known as "Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization", while the calculation of the sequence e1, ..., e"k" is known as "Gram–Schmidt orthonormalization" as the vectors are normalized.
To check that these formulas yield an orthogonal sequence, first compute ‹ u1,u2 › by substituting the above formula for u2: we get zero. Then use this to compute ‹ u1,u3 › again by substituting the formula for u3: we get zero. The general proof proceeds by mathematical induction.
Geometrically, this method proceeds as follows: to compute u"i", it projects v"i" orthogonally onto the subspace "U" generated by u1, ..., u"i"−1, which is the same as the subspace generated by v1, ..., v"i"−1. The vector u"i" is then defined to be the difference between v"i" and this projection, guaranteed to be orthogonal to all of the vectors in the subspace "U".
The Gram–Schmidt process also applies to a linearly independent countably infinite sequence {v"i"}"i". The result is an orthogonal (or orthonormal) sequence {u"i"}"i" such that for natural number "n":
the algebraic span of v1, ..., v"n" is the same as that of u1, ..., u"n".
If the Gram–Schmidt process is applied to a linearly dependent sequence, it outputs the 0 vector on the "i"th step, assuming that v"i" is a linear combination of . If an orthonormal basis is to be produced, then the algorithm should test for zero vectors in the output and discard them because no multiple of a zero vector can have a length of 1. The number of vectors output by the algorithm will then be the dimension of the space spanned by the original inputs.
A variant of the Gram–Schmidt process using transfinite recursion applied to a (possibly uncountably) infinite sequence of vectors formula_6 yields a set of orthonormal vectors formula_7 with formula_8 such that for any formula_9, the completion of the span of formula_10 is the same as that of formula_11. In particular, when applied to a (algebraic) basis of a Hilbert space (or, more generally, a basis of any dense subspace), it yields a (functional-analytic) orthonormal basis. Note that in the general case often the strict inequality formula_12 holds, even if the starting set was linearly independent, and the span of formula_7 need not be a subspace of the span of formula_6 (rather, it's a subspace of its completion).
Example.
Consider the following set of vectors in R2 (with the conventional inner product)
Now, perform Gram–Schmidt, to obtain an orthogonal set of vectors:
We check that the vectors u1 and u2 are indeed orthogonal:
noting that if the dot product of two vectors is "0" then they are orthogonal.
For non-zero vectors, we can then normalize the vectors by dividing out their sizes as shown above:
Numerical stability.
When this process is implemented on a computer, the vectors formula_21 are often not quite orthogonal, due to rounding errors. For the Gram–Schmidt process as described above (sometimes referred to as "classical Gram–Schmidt") this loss of orthogonality is particularly bad; therefore, it is said that the (classical) Gram–Schmidt process is numerically unstable.
The Gram–Schmidt process can be stabilized by a small modification; this version is sometimes referred to as modified Gram-Schmidt or MGS.
This approach gives the same result as the original formula in exact arithmetic and introduces smaller errors in finite-precision arithmetic.
Instead of computing the vector u"k" as
it is computed as
Each step finds a vector formula_24 orthogonal to formula_25. Thus formula_24 is also orthogonalized against any errors introduced in computation of formula_25.
This method is used in the previous animation, when the intermediate v'3 vector is used when orthogonalizing the blue vector v3.
Algorithm.
The following algorithm implements the stabilized Gram–Schmidt orthonormalization. The vectors v1, ..., v"k" are replaced by orthonormal vectors which span the same subspace.
The cost of this algorithm is asymptotically 2"nk"2 floating point operations, where "n" is the dimensionality of the vectors .
Determinant formula.
The result of the Gram–Schmidt process may be expressed in a non-recursive formula using determinants.
where "D" 0=1 and, for "j" ≥ 1, "D j" is the Gram determinant
Note that the expression for uk is a "formal" determinant, i.e. the matrix contains both scalars
and vectors; the meaning of this expression is defined to be the result of a cofactor expansion along
the row of vectors.
The determinant formula for the Gram-Schmidt is computationally slower (exponentially slower) than the recursive algorithms described above;
it is mainly of theoretical interest.
Alternatives.
Other orthogonalization algorithms use Householder transformations or Givens rotations. The algorithms using Householder transformations are more stable than the stabilized Gram–Schmidt process. On the other hand, the Gram–Schmidt process produces the formula_31th orthogonalized vector after the formula_31th iteration, while orthogonalization using Householder reflections produces all the vectors only at the end. This makes only the Gram–Schmidt process applicable for iterative methods like the Arnoldi iteration.
Yet another alternative is motivated by the use of Cholesky decomposition for inverting the matrix of the normal equations in linear least squares. Let formula_33 be a full column rank matrix, whose columns need to be orthogonalized. The matrix formula_34 is Hermitian and positive definite, so it can be written as formula_35 using the Cholesky decomposition. The lower triangular matrix formula_36 with strictly positive diagonal entries is invertible. Then columns of the matrix formula_37 are orthonormal and span the same subspace as the columns of the original matrix formula_33. The explicit use of the product formula_34 makes the algorithm unstable, especially if the product's condition number is large. Nevertheless, this algorithm is used in practice and implemented in some software packages because of its high efficiency and simplicity.
In quantum mechanics there are several orthogonalization schemes with characteristics better suited for applications than the Gram–Schmidt one. The most important among them are the symmetric and the canonical orthonormalization (see Solivérez & Gagliano).

</doc>
<doc id="82365" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82365" title="Spheroid">
Spheroid

A spheroid, or ellipsoid of revolution, is a quadric surface obtained by rotating an ellipse about one of its principal axes; in other words, an ellipsoid with two equal semi-diameters.
If the ellipse is rotated about its major axis, the result is a prolate (elongated) spheroid, like an American football or rugby ball. If the ellipse is rotated about its minor axis, the result is an oblate (flattened) spheroid, like a lentil. If the generating ellipse is a circle, the result is a sphere. A spheroid has circular symmetry.
Because of the combined effects of gravity and rotation, the Earth's shape is not quite a sphere but instead is slightly flattened in the direction of its axis of rotation. For that reason, in cartography the Earth is often approximated by an oblate spheroid instead of a sphere. The current World Geodetic System model uses a spheroid whose radius is 6,378.137 km at the equator and 6,356.752 km at the poles.
The word "spheroid" originally meant an "approximately spherical body", admitting irregularities even beyond the bi- or tri-axial ellipsoidal shape, and that is how it is used in some older papers on geodesy (for example, referring to truncated spherical harmonic expansions of the Earth).
Equation.
The equation of a tri-axial ellipsoid centred at the origin with semi-axes , and aligned along the coordinate axes is
The equation of a spheroid with as the symmetry axis is given by setting : 
The semi-axis is the equatorial radius of the spheroid, and is the distance from centre to pole along the symmetry axis. There are two possible cases:
The case of reduces to a sphere.
Properties.
Area.
An oblate spheroid with has surface area
The oblate spheroid is generated by rotation about the -axis of an ellipse with semi-major axis and semi-minor axis , therefore may be identified as the eccentricity. (See ellipse.)
A prolate spheroid with has surface area
The prolate spheroid is generated by rotation about the -axis of an ellipse with semi-major axis and semi-minor axis , therefore may again be identified as the eccentricity. (See ellipse.) 
These formulas are identical in the sense that the formula for can be used to calculate the surface area of a prolate spheroid and vice versa. However, then becomes imaginary and can no longer directly be identified with the eccentricity. Both of these results may be cast into many other forms using standard mathematical identities and relations between parameters of the ellipse.
Volume.
The volume inside a spheroid (of any kind) is . If is the equatorial diameter, and is the polar diameter, the volume is .
Curvature.
If a spheroid is parameterized as
where is the reduced or parametric latitude, is the longitude, and and , then its Gaussian curvature is
and its mean curvature is
Both of these curvatures are always positive, so that every point on a spheroid is elliptic.
Aspect ratio.
The aspect ratio of an oblate spheroid/ellipse, , is the ratio of the polar to equatorial lengths, while the flattening (also called oblateness) , is the ratio of the equatorial-polar length difference to the equatorial length:
These are just two of several different parameters used to define an ellipse and its solid body counterparts.
Applications.
The most common shapes for the density distribution of protons and neutrons in an atomic nucleus are spherical, prolate and oblate spheroidal, where the polar axis is assumed to be the spin axis (or direction of the spin angular momentum vector). Deformed nuclear shapes occur as a result of the competition between electromagnetic repulsion between protons, surface tension and quantum shell effects.
Oblate spheroids.
The oblate spheroid is the approximate shape of many planets and celestial bodies, including Saturn, Jupiter and the quickly-spinning star, Altair; in particular, cartographic and geodetic systems for the Earth are based on a reference ellipsoid. An extreme example of an oblate planet in science-fiction is Mesklin, in Hal Clement's novel "Mission of Gravity".
Prolate spheroids.
The prolate spheroid is the shape of the ball in several sports, such as in rugby football.
Several moons of the Solar system approximate prolate spheroids in shape, though they are actually triaxial ellipsoids. Examples are Mimas, Enceladus, and Tethys (satellites of Saturn) and Miranda (a satellite of Uranus).
In contrast to being distorted into oblate spheroids via rapid rotation, celestial objects distort slightly into prolate spheroids via tidal forces when they orbit a massive body in a close orbit. The most extreme example is Jupiter's moon Io, which becomes slightly more or less prolate in its orbit due to a slight eccentricity, causing spectacular volcanism. It should be noted that the major axis of the prolate spheroid does not run through the satellite's poles in this case, but through the two points on its equator directly facing toward and away from the primary. A famous example in science fiction is Jinx in Larry Niven's "Known Space".
It is also used to describe the shape of some nebulae (nebulas) such as the Crab Nebula.
The atomic nuclei of the Actinide elements are shaped like prolate spheroids.
Many submarines have a shape which can be described as prolate spheroid.

</doc>
<doc id="82368" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82368" title="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs">
Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs

Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs (SICP) is a textbook aiming to teach the principles of computer programming, such as abstraction in programming, metalinguistic abstraction, recursion, interpreters, and modular programming. It is widely considered a classic text in computer science, and is colloquially known as the wizard book, due to the wizard on the jacket. It was first published in 1985 by MIT Press and written by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professors Harold Abelson and Gerald Jay Sussman, with Julie Sussman. It was formerly used as the textbook of MIT introductory programming class and at other schools. Before SICP, the introductory courses were almost always filled with learning the details of some programming language, while SICP focuses on finding general patterns from specific problems and building software tools that embody each pattern.
Content.
Using Scheme, a dialect of the Lisp programming language, the book explains core computer science concepts.
The program also introduces a practical implementation of the register machine concept, defining and developing an assembler for such a construct, which is used as a virtual machine for the implementation of interpreters and compilers in the book, and as a testbed for illustrating the implementation and effect of modifications to the evaluation mechanism. Working Scheme systems based on the design described in this book are quite common student projects.
Characters.
The book uses some fictional characters repeatedly:
License.
The book is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike 4.0 License.
Coursework.
The book was used as the textbook of MIT's old introductory programming class, 6.001. This class has been replaced by 6.01, which uses Python. Other schools also made use of the book as a course textbook. The second edition (ISBN 0-262-51087-1) appeared in 1996.
More recently it is used as the textbook of MIT's Large Scale Symbolic Systems class, 6.945.
Reception.
"Byte" recommended SICP "for professional programmers who are really interested in their profession". The magazine stated that the book was not easy to read, but that it would expose experienced programmers to both old and new topics.
Influence.
SICP has been influential in computer science education, and a number of later books have been inspired by its style.

</doc>
<doc id="82370" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82370" title="Indy grab">
Indy grab

An Indy grab, also known as an Indy air, is an aerial skateboarding, snowboarding and kitesurfing trick during which the rider grabs his/her back hand on the middle of his board, between his/her feet, on the side of the board where his toes are pointing, while turning backside. The Indy grab is a generic skateboarding trick that has been performed since the late 1970s. This trick is performed mainly while vert skating, e.g. on halfpipes. Although this move can be done on flat land, it is much easier on a ramp. The Indy grab is one of the basic tricks in vert skating and is usually combined with spins, kickflips and heelflips.
The Indy air was originally called the Gunnair, which was invented by Gunnar Haugo in 1977. By 1980, the trick was renamed the Indy air, which was popularized by Duane Peters. The trick involves doing a backside air while gripping one's board on the toe side, between the feet with the trailing hand. If the board is grabbed during a frontside air, the trick is simply called a "frontside air", as opposed to a frontside Ollie, in which there is no grab. Many variations have come into existence as skaters push the limits of creativity and physical exertion. Two of the most popular variations are the kickflip Indy and Indy nosebone.
The term "Indy grab" may also be misapplied to any aerial in which the rider grabs the toe side of his board with their trailing hand (as in snowboarding). This confusion is partly due to the name's being applied to all such grabs in the Tony Hawk's Pro Skater video game.

</doc>
<doc id="82373" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82373" title="Europa (rocket)">
Europa (rocket)

The Europa rocket was an early expendable launch system of the European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO), which was the precursor to the European Space Agency and its Ariane family of launchers. Europa was built to develop space access technology and put European-wide telecommunication and meteorological satellites in orbit. The rocket primarily consisted of Blue Streak, Coralie, and Astris rocket stages.
History.
The British Blue Streak ballistic missile was cancelled in 1960, when it was realised it could not compete with the types of missile that the Americans or Russians were building. As part of deciding how to implement Blue Streak inconspicuously, the British inadvertently arrived at the concept of the missile launch facility (missile silos), although none were actually built in Britain. The difficult storage of liquid oxygen in the rocket stalled the introduction of Blue Streak.
The Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough was given the job of considering how the missile could be adapted as a satellite launching vehicle, in conjunction with other rocket stages. Peter Thorneycroft, Baron Thorneycroft, the Minister of Aviation, in 1961 thought about a joint European project, the main intention being not to waste the (advanced) development of the rocket, and not to leave space exploration to the Americans and Russians. A possible Anglo-French collaboration was looked at, and ELDO was signed on 16 April 1962.
The three-stage design was arrived at, and given the name Eldo A, later named Europa.
In January 1965, the French thought the initial three-stage rocket design would not be sufficiently advanced to carry the size of payloads required, and another rocket - Eldo B - with liquid hydrogen as fuel for the second and third stages to be the better first design, partly due to reduce the cost of the project by eliminating transition test launchers. It would still use the Blue Streak as the first stage. ELDO later disagreed, but the French would get their way, as Eldo B would become Ariane, first launching in 1979.
The programme was initiated by the UK and the first launch was planned for November 1966, but the first two-stage launch occurred in August 1967, with three stages (Europa 1) in November 1968.
By April 1966, estimated costs had increased to £150 million, from an initial estimated of £70 million. Hopes were not high that it would be suitable for the job. The Italians wanted to give up on ELDO and go for a single European space organisation, not divided nationally as ELDO.
Britain was contributing 40% of the costs. In early June 1966, the British government (Fred Mulley) decided it could not afford the cost, and wanted to leave the ELDO organisation - one of the few European organisations in which it was a lead player. This was also at a time when satellite technology was about to change the world. But geosynchronous satellites would need to be 22,000 miles above Earth, not Europa 1's 125 miles altitude. Britain's contribution was reduced to 27%.
In mid-November 1968, a European Space Conference in Bonn decided on a proposal to merge ELDO with ESRO to form a pan-European space authority by early 1970; ESA would not be formed until 1975. Britain was lukewarm to the idea, because it did not believe Europe could launch satellites economically.
By 1970 the French launch base in French Guiana had cost £45 million, and in that year France became the most important partner in the project, then planning to build two-thirds of the rocket as well as owning the launch site. Although only on paper, Britain's involvement in the project was much reduced, after being largely responsible (with an Australian launch site) for getting the entire project going in the first place. However all of the launchers, to the very end, were completely dependent on the British rocket in the first stage.
In 1970 the project was under a perceived economic threat from America's proposed Space Shuttle - Europe knew it could not build (and never has) a similar launcher. However the Space Shuttle would never pose an economic threat due to its immense launch costs.
By 1971, over £250 million had been spent on the project, with Europa 2 costing over £4 million.
Division of labour.
Tasks were to be distributed between nations: the United Kingdom would provide the first stage (derived from the Blue Streak missile), France would build the second and Germany the third stage. It would carry a satellite designed and built in Italy, weighing around a ton. The telemetry was to be developed by the Netherlands. Belgium was to develop the down range ground guidance system.
By 1969 ELDO was beginning to realise that dividing work up by country led to not enough overall collaboration, with a disjointed framework of planning. This disjointed structure led to the many unsuccessful launch attempts, with no-one really in charge.
The West Germans blamed the explosion of Europa 2 in November 1971 on the immense divisions within ELDO.
Programme of launcher types.
The Europa programme was divided into 4 successive projects :
Outcome.
The project was marred by technical problems. Although the first stage (the British Blue Streak) launched successfully on each occasion, it was the second or third stage that failed.
Background.
Payloads.
The payload for the rocket was overseen by the European Space Research Organization - ESRO. Satellites were proposed to be launched by 1969 or 1970, in a circular polar orbit at an altitude of 125 miles. ESRO organised the development of early satellites such as ESRO 2B (Iris), built by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics and Engins Matra.
In 1967, it was decided the payloads were to be launched by 1970 from French Guiana, not Australia. In April 1969, Britain decided to invest in a satellite television project by the European Broadcasting Union.
By the early 1970s the French-German Symphonie communications satellite were in production, but by then Europa was cancelled in November 1971.
First stage.
It was tested three times in 1964, and also in 1965, with a dummy upper stages in 1965. It was assisted by the British National Committee for Space Research. The chief project engineer of the rocket's assembly at the space projects division of Hawker Siddeley Dynamics was Dr Geoffrey Pardoe, also the project manager of Blue Streak from 1956 to 1960 (when under de Havilland). In August 1965, the Blue Streak was tested (static firing trial) with (complete full-weight) dummy upper stages at RAF Spadeadam (the site was owned by Rolls Royce), with first successful firing on 23 September 1965 lasting 135 seconds. Five days later the site was visited by the Minister of Aviation, Roy Jenkins.
In January 1966, it had been transported to Adelaide, Australia, for launches later that year. Also in the UK in 1967 the go-ahead had been given for the UK's (separately developed) three-stage Black Arrow rocket launcher (made by Westland Aircraft, with Bristol Siddeley rocket engines developed at the Rocket Propulsion Establishment at Westcott, Buckinghamshire) - Britain did not need to rely on Europa, and Black Arrow would be ready first.
Britain then withdrew from ELDO, to concentrate on the Black Arrow, but was committed to supplying ELDO with two Blue Streak rocket stages a year until 1976. At this time in 1969, Britain was spending £30 million a year on space, controlled from the Space Division of the Ministry of Technology. Britain was still dealing with, and funding, ESRO.
Due to Britain's withdrawal in 1968, ELDO in June 1969 had other ideas than staying with the Blue Streak launcher for Europa's first stage, to give technical work to countries that were still (loyally) part of the organisation. Unfortunately, few other European countries had sufficiently advanced technical knowledge of rockets at that time. The Blue Streak had worked much more successfully than the other engine stages. Nonetheless Blue Streak, ELDO's most successful rocket to that date, was replaced. On 28 April 1970 at a meeting in Paris, ELDO replaced the Blue Streak with the French-made Diamant. Britain's most significant involvement with the project came to an end. The following year Britain would put its own rocket programme, Black Arrow, (prematurely) out of operation.
By 1970 Hawker Siddeley's Blue Streak launcher had cost £100 million to develop. It was still planned to be used on Europa until 1973, when Diamant would be used as the first stage. Blue Streak was used for the Europa 2's one and only launch on 5 November 1971.
Second stage.
The French had developed rockets through their Véronique, which was originally planned to be the second stage.
The Coralie was to be tested at Colomb-Béchar in the Béchar Province of western Algeria. Tests began in December 1965 at Vernon, Eure in France, west of Paris. The first successful firing was on 28 November 1966 in northern Africa.
Société Européenne de Propulsion (SEP), at Vernon, would later develop the Viking main engines for Ariane.
Third stage.
This was made in Germany by Entwicklungsring Nord (ERNO Raumfahrttechnik GmbH), based in Bremen, from 1969. The German consortium itself was known as Arbeitsgemeinschaft Satellitenträgersystem (ASAT), which consisted of ERNO and MBB. Although assembled by ERNO in Bremen, the engine was made by Société d'Etudes pour la Propulsion par Réaction (SEPR), part of Snecma in Villaroche.
On 2 July 1969, on a launch at Woomera of the three-stage 108 foot rocket, the "Astris" third stage failed to light, after the other two had successfully fired.
After the third stage, an apogee kick motor would be used to put a satellite into a synchronous orbit.
ERNO would later develop the second stage for the Ariane launcher, at the Vereinigte Flugtechnische Werke (VFW) factory in Bremen, later owned by Daimler Benz Aerospace then DaimlerChrysler Aerospace (DASA).
Project history.
The first test took place at 9.14am local time on 5 June 1964 at Woomera. Thrust was terminated after 147 seconds, 6 seconds earlier than planned. The point of impact was 625 miles from the launch site, instead of the intended 950 miles. It reached a height of 110 miles and a maximum speed of 6,400 mph. Near space is considered to be around 60–70 miles. The craft's structure was built by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics and the rocket engine were the Rolls-Royce RZ2. At this stage the French and German rocket stages were mere fibre-glass scale models.
The first full-size launch, weighing in total 104 tons, took place at Woomera on 24 May 1966, with dummy upper stages. Tests were conducted by Australia's Weapons Research Establishment and the French Laboratoire de Recherche en Balistique et Aérodynamique (based at Vernon). After two minutes and fifteen seconds, six seconds short of the planned flight, the rocket was destroyed as it was thought (by an impact predictor) to be veering west of the planned trajectory. However, the rocket was exactly on courses and inaccurate readings had been picked up by a radar station 120 miles away.
Two-stage testing was planned for June 1967. At 11.12pm GMT on 30 November 1968, the first three-stage Europa 1 launcher put a 550 lb Italian satellite-model into orbit.
The first launch from French Guiana on 5 November 1971 was also the first launch of the four-stage Europa 2. It exploded over the Atlantic after three minutes. It landed in the sea 302 miles from the launch site, and had reached a height of 40 miles.

</doc>
<doc id="82374" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82374" title="Thomas Jefferson University">
Thomas Jefferson University

Thomas Jefferson University is a private health sciences university in Center City, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in the United States. The university consists of six constituent colleges and schools, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Jefferson College of Biomedical Sciences, Jefferson College of Health Professions, Jefferson College of Nursing, Jefferson College of Pharmacy, and Jefferson College of Population Health. In 2016, the Sidney Kimmel Medical College was ranked by "U.S. News & World Report" as tied for 56th place among research institutions and tied for 54th among primary care institutions.
History.
During the early 19th century, several attempts to create a second medical school in Philadelphia had been stymied, largely due to the efforts of University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine alumni. In an attempt to circumvent that opposition, a group of Philadelphia physicians led by Dr. George McClellan sent a letter to the trustees of Jefferson College in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania (now Washington & Jefferson College) in 1824, asking the College to establish a medical department in Philadelphia. The trustees agreed, establishing the Medical Department of Jefferson College in Philadelphia in 1825. In response to a second request, the Pennsylvania General Assembly granted an expansion of Jefferson College's charter in 1826, endorsing the creation of the new department and allowing it to grant medical degrees. An additional 10 Jefferson College trustees were appointed to supervise the new facility from Philadelphia, owing to the difficulty of managing a medical department on the other side of the state. Two years later, this second board was granted authority to manage the Medical Department, while the Jefferson College trustees maintained veto power for major decisions.
The first class was graduated in 1826, receiving their degrees only after the disposition of a lawsuit seeking to close the school. The first classes were held in the Tivoli Theater on Prune Street in Philadelphia, which had the first medical clinic attached to a medical school. Owing to the teaching philosophy of Dr. McClellan, classes focused on clinical practice. In 1828, the Medical Department moved to the Ely Building, which allowed for a large lecture space and the "Pit," a 700-seat amphitheater to allow students to view surgeries. This building had an attached hospital, the second such medical school/hospital arrangement in the nation, servicing 441 inpatients and 4,659 outpatients in its first year of operation. The relationship with Jefferson College survived until 1838, when the Medical Department received a separate charter, allowing it operate separately as the Jefferson Medical College. At this time, all instructors, including McClellan, were vacated from the school and the trustees hired all new individuals to teach. This has been considered the time at which the school came to be considered a "legitimate" medical school.
By 1844 Jefferson was providing patient beds over a shop at 10th and Sansom Streets. A 125-bed hospital, one of the first in the nation affiliated with a medical school, opened in 1877, and a school for nurses began in 1891. The Medical College became Thomas Jefferson University on July 1, 1969. As an academic health care center, Jefferson is currently involved in education, medical research, and patient care. Jefferson Medical College is the 9th oldest American medical school that is in existence today.
On June 17, 2014 Sidney Kimmel donated $110 million to Jefferson Medical College, prompting the announcement that Jefferson Medical College will now be renamed as the Sidney Kimmel Medical College 
Affiliations.
The University is affiliated with Thomas Jefferson University Hospitals (TJUH)—including Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Jefferson Hospital for Neuroscience, and Methodist Hospital (Philadelphia).
Thomas Jefferson University is also the primary academic affiliate of the Jefferson Health System. Jefferson Health System was founded in 1995 when Thomas Jefferson University Hospital and the Main Line Health System signed an agreement establishing a new, nonprofit, corporate entity known as the Jefferson Health System. The agreement brought together the Thomas Jefferson University Hospitals, Inc. and Main Line Health under one corporate parent. Since then, other established networks have joined Jefferson Health System as founding members, which at one point included the Albert Einstein Healthcare Network, Frankford Health Care System (now Aria Health), Main Line Health and Magee Rehabilitation Hospital.
On June 20, 2013 the board of directors for both organizations announced that Dr. Stephen Klasko would assume the role of President and CEO for both Thomas Jefferson University and the TJUH System in an effort to unify the clinical and educational missions on campus. In March 2014, the Jefferson Health System was dissolved "in order for (TJUH) to move forward" and "be nimble and agile, but also not be constrained by a corporate relationship that in some respects put some limits on what we could do," according to Stephen K. Klasko, Jefferson's President and Chief Executive of both Thomas Jefferson University and the parent Thomas Jefferson University Hospitals Inc.
"The Gross Clinic".
In January 2007, the University sold Thomas Eakins' painting "The Gross Clinic", which depicts a surgery that took place at the school, for $68 million, to the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, in association with the Philadelphia Museum of Art. A reproduction hangs in its place at Jefferson University.

</doc>
<doc id="82375" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82375" title="IDM">
IDM

IDM may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="82379" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82379" title="Analemma">
Analemma

In astronomy, an analemma (; from Greek ἀνάλημμα "support") is a diagram showing the deviation of the Sun from its mean motion in the sky, as viewed from a fixed location on the Earth. Due to the Earth's axial tilt and orbital eccentricity, the Sun will not be in the same position in the sky at the same time every day. The north–south component of the analemma is the Sun's declination, and the east–west component is the equation of time. This diagram has the form of a slender figure-eight, and can often be found on globes of the Earth.
Diagrams of analemmas frequently carry marks that show the position of the Sun at various closely spaced dates throughout the year. Analemmas with date marks can be used for various practical purposes. Without date marks, they are of little use, except as decoration.
Analemmas (as they are known today) have been used in conjunction with sundials since the 18th century to convert between apparent and mean solar time. Prior to this, the term referred to any tool or method used in the construction of sundials.
It is possible to photograph the analemma by keeping a camera at a fixed location and orientation and taking multiple exposures throughout the year, always at the same clock-time.
Although the term "analemma" usually refers to the Earth's solar analemma, it can be applied to other celestial bodies as well.
Description.
An analemma can be traced by plotting the position of the Sun as viewed from a fixed position on Earth at the same clock time every day for an entire year, or by plotting a graph of the Sun's declination against the equation of time. The resulting curve resembles a long, slender figure-eight, a lemniscate of Bernoulli. This curve is commonly printed on terrestrial globes, usually in the eastern Pacific Ocean, the only large tropical region with very little land. It is possible, though challenging, to photograph the analemma, by leaving the camera in a fixed position for an entire year and snapping images on 24-hour intervals (or some multiple thereof); see section below.
The long axis of the figure — the line segment joining the northernmost point on the analemma to the southernmost — is bisected by the celestial equator, to which it is approximately perpendicular, and has a "length" of twice the obliquity of the ecliptic, "i.e.", about 47 degrees. The component along this axis of the Sun's apparent motion is a result of the familiar seasonal variation of the declination of the Sun through the year. The "width" of the figure is due to the equation of time, and its angular extent is the difference between the greatest positive and negative deviations of local solar time from local mean time when this time-difference is related to angle at the rate of 15 degrees per hour, "i.e.", 360 degrees/24 h. This width of the analemma is approximately 7.7 degrees, so the length of the figure is more than six times its width. The figure-eight form arises from the relationship between the direction of the Earth's axis, and the line passing through the perihelion and aphelion of the Earth's elliptical orbit around the Sun.
There are three parameters that affect the size and shape of the analemma — obliquity, eccentricity, and the angle between the apse line and the line of solstices. Viewed from an object with a perfectly circular orbit and no axial tilt, the Sun would always appear at the same point in the sky at the same time of day throughout the year and the analemma would be a dot. For an object with a circular orbit but significant axial tilt, the analemma would be a figure of eight with northern and southern lobes equal in size. For an object with an eccentric orbit but no axial tilt, the analemma would be a straight east–west line along the celestial equator.
The north–south component of the analemma shows the Sun's declination, its latitude on the celestial sphere, or the latitude on the Earth at which the Sun is directly overhead. The east–west component shows the equation of time, or the difference between solar time and local mean time. This can be interpreted as how "fast" or "slow" the Sun (or a sundial) is compared to clock time. It also shows how far west or east the Sun is, compared with its mean position. The analemma can be considered as a graph in which the Sun's declination and the equation of time are plotted against each other. In many diagrams of the analemma, a third dimension, that of time, is also included, shown by marks that represent the position of the Sun at various, fairly closely spaced, dates throughout the year.
In diagrams, the analemma is drawn as it would be seen in the sky by an observer looking upward. If north is at the top, "west" is to the "right". This corresponds with the sign of the equation of time, which is positive in the westward direction. The further west the Sun is, compared with its mean position, the more "fast" a sundial is, compared with a clock. (See Equation of time#Sign of the equation of time.) If the analemma is a graph with positive declination (north) plotted upward, positive equation of time (west) is plotted to the right. This is the conventional orientation for graphs. When the analemma is marked on a geographical globe, west in the analemma is to the right, while the geographical features on the globe are shown with west to the left. To avoid this confusion, it has been suggested that analemmas on globes should be printed with west to the left, but this is not done, at least, not frequently. In practice, the analemma is so nearly symmetrical that the shapes of the mirror images are not easily distinguished, but if date markings are present, they go in opposite directions. The Sun moves eastward on the analemma near the solstices. This can be used to tell which way the analemma is printed. See the image above, at high magnification.
An analemma that includes an image of a solar eclipse is called a tutulemma — a portmanteau coined by photographers Cenk E. Tezel and Tunç Tezel based on the Turkish word for eclipse.
Solar analemma as seen from Earth.
Owing to the tilt of Earth's axis (23.439°) and its elliptical orbit around the Sun, the relative location of the Sun above the horizon is not constant from day to day when observed at the same clock time each day. If the time of observation is not 12:00 noon local mean time, then depending on one's geographical latitude, this loop will be inclined at different angles.
The figure on the left is an example of an analemma as seen from the Earth's northern hemisphere. It is a plot of the position of the Sun at 12:00 noon at Royal Observatory, Greenwich, England (latitude 51.48°N, longitude 0.0015°W) during the year 2006. The horizontal axis is the azimuth angle in degrees (180° is facing south). The vertical axis is the altitude in degrees above the horizon. The first day of each month is shown in black, and the solstices and equinoxes are shown in green. It can be seen that the equinoxes occur at altitude , and the solstices occur at altitudes where ε is the axial tilt of the earth, 23.439°. The analemma is plotted with its width highly exaggerated, revealing a slight asymmetry (due to the two-week misalignment between the apsides of the Earth's orbit and its solstices).
The analemma is oriented with the smaller loop appearing north of the larger loop. At the North Pole, the analemma would be completely upright (an 8 with the small loop at the top), and you'd only be able to see the top half of it. If you headed south, once you drop below the Arctic Circle, you'd be able to see the entire analemma. If you see it at noon, it continues to be upright, and rises higher from the horizon as you move south. When you get to the equator, it is directly overhead. As you go further south, it moves toward the northern horizon, and is then seen with the larger loop at the top. If, on the other hand, you looked at the analemma in the early morning or evening, it would start to tilt to one side as you moved southward from the North Pole. By time you got down to the equator, the analemma would be completely horizontal. Then, as you continued to go south, it would continue rotating so that the small loop was beneath the large loop in the sky. Once you crossed the Antarctic Circle, the analemma, now nearly completely inverted, would start to disappear, until only 50%, part of the larger loop, was visible from the South Pole.
See equation of time for a more detailed description of the east–west characteristics of the analemma.
Photography of the analemma.
The first analemma photograph ever made was created in 1978–1979 by photographer Dennis di Cicco over New England in the United States. He made 44 exposures on a single frame of film, all taken from the same location with a solar filter. Since then, most photographers take a single foreground image and superimpose multiple Sun images on top of it.
Estimating sunrise and sunset data, using analemma.
If it is marked to show the position of the Sun on it on fairly frequent dates, such as the first, eleventh, and twenty-first days of every calendar month, the analemma summarises the apparent movements of the Sun, relative to its mean position, throughout the year. A date-marked diagram of the analemma, with equal scales in both north–south and east–west directions, can be used as a tool to estimate quantities such as the times of sunrise and sunset, which depend on the Sun's position. Generally, making these estimates depends on visualizing the analemma as a rigid structure in the sky, which moves around the Earth at constant speed so it rises and sets once a day, with the Sun slowly moving around it once a year. Some approximations are involved in the process, chiefly the use of a plane diagram to represent things on the celestial sphere, and the use of drawing and measurement instead of numerical calculation. Because of these, the estimates are not perfectly precise, but they are usually good enough for practical purposes. Also, they have instructional value, showing in a simple visual way how the times of sunrises and sunsets vary.
Earliest and latest sunrise and sunset.
The analemma can be used to find the dates of the earliest and latest sunrises and sunsets of the year. These do not occur on the dates of the solstices.
With reference to the image of a simulated analemma in the eastern sky, the lowest point of the analemma has just risen above the horizon. If the Sun were at that point, sunrise would have just occurred. This would be the latest sunrise of the year, since all other points on the analemma would rise earlier. Therefore, the date of the latest sunrise is when the Sun is at this lowest point (29 December, when the analemma is tilted as seen from latitude 50° North, as is shown in the diagram). Similarly, when the Sun is at the highest point on the analemma, near its top-left end, (on 15 June) the earliest sunrise of the year will occur. Likewise, at sunset, the earliest sunset will occur when the Sun is at its lowest point on the analemma when it is close to the western horizon, and the latest sunset when it is at the highest point.
None of these points is exactly at one of the ends of the analemma, where the Sun is at a solstice. As seen from north-mid-temperate latitudes, as the diagram shows, the earliest sunset occurs some time before the December solstice - typically a week or two before it - and the latest sunrise happens a week or two after the solstice. Thus, the darkest evening occurs in early to mid-December, but the mornings keep getting darker until about the New Year.
The exact dates are those on which the Sun is at the points where the horizon is tangential to the analemma, which in turn depend on how much the analemma, or the north–south meridian passing through it, is tilted from the vertical. This angle of tilt is essentially the co-latitude (90 degrees minus the latitude) of the observer. Calculating these dates numerically is complex, but they can be estimated fairly accurately by placing a straight-edge, tilted at the appropriate angle, tangential to a diagram of the analemma, and reading the dates (interpolating as necessary) when the Sun is at the positions of contact.
In temperate latitudes, the dates get further from the solstices as the absolute value of the latitude decreases. In near-equatorial latitudes, the situation is more complex. The analemma lies almost horizontal, so the horizon can be tangential to it at two points, one in each loop of the analemma. Thus there are two widely separated dates in the year when the Sun rises earlier than on adjoining dates, and so on.
Times of sunrise and sunset.
A similar geometrical method, based on the analemma, can be used to find the times of sunrise and sunset at any place on the Earth (except within or close to the Arctic or Antarctic Circle), on any date.
The "origin" of the analemma, where the solar declination and the equation of time are both zero, rises and sets at 6 am and 6 pm local mean time on every day of the year, irrespective of the latitude of the observer. (This estimation does not take account of atmospheric refraction.) If the analemma is drawn in a diagram, tilted at the appropriate angle for an observer's latitude (as described above), and if a horizontal line is drawn to pass through the position of the Sun on the analemma on any given date (interpolating between the date markings as necessary), then at sunrise this line represents the horizon. The origin moves along the celestial equator at a speed of 15 degrees per hour, the speed of the Earth's rotation. The distance along the equator from the point where it intersects the horizon to the position of the origin of the analemma at sunrise is the distance the origin moves between 6 am and the time of sunrise on the given date. Measuring the length of this equatorial segment therefore gives the difference between 6 am and the time of sunrise.
The measurement should, of course, be done on the diagram, but it should be expressed in terms of the angle that would be subtended at an observer on the ground by the corresponding distance in the analemma in the sky. It can be useful to compare it with the length of the analemma, which subtends 47 degrees. Thus, for example, if the length of the equatorial segment on the diagram is 0.4 times the length of the analemma on the diagram, then the segment in the celestial analemma would subtend 0.4 × 47 or 18.8 degrees at the observer on the ground. The angle, in degrees, should be divided by 15 to get the time difference in hours between sunrise and 6 am. The sign of the difference is clear from the diagram. If the horizon line at sunrise passes above the origin of the analemma, the Sun rises before 6 am, and "vice versa".
The same technique can be used, "mutatis mutandis", to estimate the time of sunset. Note that the estimated times are in local mean time. Corrections must be applied to convert them to standard time or daylight saving time. These corrections will include a term that involves the observer's longitude, so both his latitude and longitude affect the final result.
Azimuths of sunrise and sunset.
The azimuths (true compass bearings) of the points on the horizon where the Sun rises and sets can be easily estimated, using the same diagram as is used to find the times of sunrise and sunset, as described above.
The point where the horizon intersects the equator represents due east or west. The point where the Sun is at sunrise or sunset represents the direction of sunrise or sunset. Simply measuring the distance along the horizon between these points, in angular terms (comparing it with the length of the analemma, as described above), gives the angle between due east or west and the direction of sunrise or sunset. Whether the sunrise or sunset is north or south of due east or west is clear from the diagram. The larger loop of the analemma is at its southern end.
Solar analemmas seen from other planets.
On Earth, the analemma appears as a figure eight, but on other solar system bodies it may be very different because of the interplay between the tilt of each body's axis and the elliptical shape of its orbit. So, if one of these (like eccentricity) always dominates the other (as is the case on Mars), we get a teardrop. If one of them (like eccentricity) is significant and the other is practically zero (as is the case on Jupiter, with a 3 degree tilt only), you get something much closer to an ellipse. If both are important enough, that sometimes eccentricity dominates and sometimes axial tilt dominates, you get a figure 8.
In the following list, "day" and "year" refer to the synodic day and sidereal year of the particular body:
Analemmas of geosynchronous satellites.
Geosynchronous satellites revolve around the Earth with a period of one sidereal day. Seen from a fixed point on the Earth's surface, they trace paths in the sky which repeat every day, and are therefore simple and meaningful analemmas. They are generally roughly elliptical, teardrop shaped, or figure-8 in shape. Their shapes and dimensions depend on the parameters of the orbits. A subset of geosynchronous satellites are geostationary ones, which ideally have perfectly circular orbits, exactly in the Earth's equatorial plane. A geostationary satellite therefore ideally remains stationary relative to the Earth's surface, staying over a single point on the equator. No real satellite is exactly geostationary, so real ones trace small analemmas in the sky. Since the sizes of the orbits of geosynchronous satellites are similar to the size of the Earth, substantial parallax occurs, depending on the location of the observer on the Earth's surface, so observers in different places see different analemmas.
The paraboloidal dishes that are used for radio communication with geosynchronous satellites often have to move so as to follow the satellite's daily movement around its analemma. The mechanisms that drive them must therefore be programmed with the parameters of the analemma. Exceptions are dishes that are used with (approximately) geostationary satellites, since these satellites appear to move so little that a fixed dish can function adequately at all times.

</doc>
<doc id="82381" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82381" title="Electron capture">
Electron capture

Electron capture (K-electron capture, also K-capture, or L-electron capture, L-capture) is a process in which the proton-rich nucleus of an electrically neutral atom absorbs an inner atomic electron, usually from the K or L electron shell. This process thereby changes a nuclear proton to a neutron and simultaneously causes the emission of an electron neutrino.
The daughter nuclide, if it is in an excited state, then transitions to its ground state. Usually, a gamma ray is emitted during this transition, but nuclear de-excitation may also take place by internal conversion.
Following capture of an inner electron from the atom, an outer electron replaces the electron that was captured and one or more characteristic X-ray photons is emitted in this process. Electron capture sometimes also results in the Auger effect, where an electron is ejected from the atom's electron shell due to interactions between the atom's electrons in the process of seeking a lower energy electron state.
Following electron capture, the atomic number is reduced by one, the neutron number is increased by one, and there is no change in atomic mass. Simple electron capture results in a neutral atom, since the loss of the electron in the electron shell is balanced by a loss of positive nuclear charge. However, a positive atomic ion may result from further Auger electron emission.
Electron capture is an example of weak interaction, one of the four fundamental forces.
Electron capture is the primary decay mode for isotopes with a relative superabundance of protons in the nucleus, but with insufficient energy difference between the isotope and its prospective daughter (the isobar with one less positive charge) for the nuclide to decay by emitting a positron. Electron capture is always an alternate decay mode for radioactive isotopes that do not have sufficient energy to decay by positron emission. It is sometimes called inverse beta decay, though this term can also refer to the interaction of an electron antineutrino with a proton.
If the energy difference between the parent atom and the daughter atom is less than 1.022 MeV, positron emission is forbidden as not enough decay energy is available to allow it, and thus electron capture is the sole decay mode. For example, rubidium-83 (37 protons, 46 neutrons) will decay to krypton-83 (36 protons, 47 neutrons) solely by electron capture (the energy difference, or decay energy, is about 0.9 MeV).
A free proton cannot normally be changed to a free neutron by this process; the proton and neutron must be part of a larger nucleus.
History.
The theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed by Luis Alvarez, in vanadium-48. He reported it in a 1937 paper in "Physical Review". Alvarez went on to study electron capture in gallium-67 and other nuclides.
Reaction details.
Examples:
The electron that is captured is one of the atom's own electrons, and not a new, incoming electron, as might be suggested by the way the above reactions are written. Radioactive isotopes that decay by pure electron capture can be inhibited from radioactive decay if they are fully ionized ("stripped" is sometimes used to describe such ions). It is hypothesized that such elements, if formed by the r-process in exploding supernovae, are ejected fully ionized and so do not undergo radioactive decay as long as they do not encounter electrons in outer space. Anomalies in elemental distributions are thought to be partly a result of this effect on electron capture. Inverse decays can also be induced by full ionisation; for instance, 163Ho decays into 163Dy by electron capture; however, a fully ionised 163Dy decays into a bound state of 163Ho by the process of bound-state β− decay.
Chemical bonds can also affect the rate of electron capture to a small degree (in general, less than 1%) depending on the proximity of electrons to the nucleus. For example, in 7Be, a difference of 0.9% has been observed between half-lives in metallic and insulating environments. This relatively large effect is due to the fact that beryllium is a small atom whose valence electrons are close to the nucleus.
Around the elements in the middle of the periodic table, isotopes that are lighter than stable isotopes of the same element tend to decay through electron capture, while isotopes heavier than the stable ones decay by electron emission. Electron capture happens most often in the heavier neutron-deficient elements where the mass change is smallest and positron emission isn't always possible. When the loss of mass in a nuclear reaction is greater than zero but less than 2m[0-1e-], the process cannot occur by positron emission but is spontaneous for electron capture.
Common examples.
Some common radioisotopes that decay by electron capture include:
For a full list, see the table of nuclides.

</doc>
<doc id="82382" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82382" title="ISO/IEC 7811">
ISO/IEC 7811

ISO/IEC 7811 "Identification cards — Recording technique" is a set of nine (7811-1 to 7811-9) standards describing the recording technique on identification cards.
It comprises:

</doc>
<doc id="82383" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82383" title="Akron, Pennsylvania">
Akron, Pennsylvania

Akron is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. It is a mid-sized town with two main roads going through it: Main Street and 7th Street Pennsylvania Route 272. The town is mostly residential with a number of small businesses. The American headquarters of the Mennonite-related relief organizations, the Mennonite Central Committee and Mennonite Disaster Service, are located in the town. The town features the Roland Park which has baseball fields, pavilions, a pond, a gazebo, tennis courts, a playground, a beach volleyball court, a basketball court, and an 18 target Disc golf course.
History.
A railroad used to run through Akron and served a railroad station in the town. A trolley also used to run in parts of the borough. The railroad has since been abandoned, but along the rail alignment remnants of the tracks can still be found—including railroad ties.
Geography.
Akron is located at (40.156472, -76.204000).
The borough is located on a hill. According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,046 people, 1,622 households, and 1,138 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,199.8 people per square mile (1,239.8/km²). There were 1,687 housing units at an average density of 1,334.2 per square mile (516.9/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 96.42% White, 0.54% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American, 1.38% Asian, 0.79% from other races, and 0.64% from two or more races. 2.22% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 1,622 households, out of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.5% were married couples living together, 7.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.8% were non-families. 24.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.86.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 21.7% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 28.3% from 25 to 44, 24.2% from 45 to 64, and 19.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 89.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.3 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $45,407, and the median income for a family was $53,365. Males had a median income of $37,061 versus $24,545 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $19,983. About 3.4% of families and 4.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.9% of those under age 18 and 8.1% of those age 65 or over.
Police, government, and fire protection.
Akron borough is an independent local government unit located in Lancaster County. It is run by an elected borough council and an elected mayor. The current Mayor of Akron is John McBeth. The Borough Council is currently run by President Thomas J. Murray Sr. The Chief of Police is Thomas Zell. The Borough of Akron also has a Fire Company established in 1893 the Akron Volunteer Fire Company Lancaster County Station 12 [http://www.akronfire.org], which has approximately 50 active members and 3 pieces of Current Operating Fire Apparatus; 1 Engine, 1 Rescue-Engine, and 1 Squad.
Economy.
The economy is mostly made up of small businesses. There are very few large businesses because the town is small and mostly residential. The largest business headquartered in Akron is the non-profit Mennonite Central Committee, which operates the Fair Trade retailer Ten Thousand Villages. Also, the locally well known Weisers Market is in Akron.
Recreation.
Loyd H. Roland Memorial Park (also known as Akron Park), http://www.akron-pa.com/parks.html, is a 70 plus acre park located on Main Street on the East side of Akron. The park has a playground, hiking trails, pond, 18 hole disc golf course, picnic pavilions and more.
Culture.
Akron is one of the many Pennsylvania towns to drop or raise a unique item at midnight on New Year's Eve. The "Shoe-In" begins several hours before midnight with children's activities, carriage rides, music, and a bonfire. People donate children's shoes which are passed on to the needy. In honor of the area's former shoe making industry (that used to be located where the Ten-Thousand Villages Corporate Offices are currently located) a giant sneaker is lowered at midnight.

</doc>
<doc id="82384" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82384" title="Heinrich Böll">
Heinrich Böll

Heinrich Theodor Böll (; 21 December 1917 – 16 July 1985) was one of Germany's foremost post-World War II writers. Böll was awarded the Georg Büchner Prize in 1967 and the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1972.
Biography.
Böll was born in Cologne, Germany, to a Catholic, pacifist family that later opposed the rise of Nazism. He refused to join the Hitler Youth during the 1930s. He was apprenticed to a bookseller before studying German at the University of Cologne. In 1942 he married Annemarie Cech with whom he was ultimately to have three sons; she later acted as his collaborator on a number of different translations of English and American literature into German that he produced over the years. Conscripted into the Wehrmacht, he served in France, Romania, Hungary and the Soviet Union, and was wounded four times (as well as contracting typhoid fever) before being captured by Americans in April 1945 and sent to a prisoner-of-war camp.
After the war he returned to Cologne and began working in his family's cabinet shop and, for one year, worked in a municipal statistical bureau, an experience which he did not enjoy and which he left in order to take the risk of becoming a writer instead.
Böll became a full-time writer at the age of 30. His first novel, "Der Zug war pünktlich" ("The Train Was on Time"), was published in 1949. He was invited to the 1949 meeting of the Group 47 circle of German authors and his work was deemed to be the best presented in 1951.
Many other novels, short stories, radio plays and essay collections followed.
Awards, honours and appointments.
Böll was extremely successful and was lauded on a number of occasions. In 1953 he was awarded the Culture Prize of German Industry, the Southern German Radio Prize and the German Critics' Prize. In 1954 he received the prize of the Tribune de Paris. In 1955 he was given the French prize for the best foreign novel. In 1958 he gained the Eduard von der Heydt prize of the city of Wuppertal and the prize of the Bavarian Academy of Arts. In 1959 he was given the Great Art Prize of the State of North-Rhine-Westphalia, the Literature Prize of the city of Cologne, and was elected to the Academy of Science and the Arts in Mainz.
In 1960 he became a member of the Bavarian Academy of Fine Arts and gained the Charles Veillon Prize.
In 1967 he was given the Georg Büchner Prize.
In 1972 he received the Nobel Prize for Literature "for his writing which through its combination of a broad perspective on his time and a sensitive skill in characterization has contributed to a renewal of German literature".
He was given a number of honorary awards up to his death, such as the membership of the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1974, and the Ossietzky Medal of 1974 (the latter for his defence of and contribution to global human rights).
Böll was President of PEN International, the worldwide association of writers and the oldest human rights organisation, between 1971–1973.
Works.
His work has been translated into more than 30 languages, and he remains one of Germany's most widely read authors. His best-known works are "Billiards at Half-past Nine" (1959), "And Never Said a Word" (1953), "The Bread of Those Early Years" (1955), "The Clown" (1963), "Group Portrait with Lady" (1971), "The Lost Honour of Katharina Blum" (1974), and "The Safety Net" (1979).
Despite the variety of themes and content in his work, there are certain recurring patterns: many of his novels and stories describe intimate and personal life struggling to sustain itself against the wider background of war, terrorism, political divisions, and profound economic and social transition. In a number of his books there are protagonists who are stubborn and eccentric individualists opposed to the mechanisms of the state or of public institutions.
Media scandals.
The 1963 publication of "The Clown" was met with polemics in the press for its negative portrayal of the Catholic Church and the CDU party. Böll was devoted to Catholicism but also deeply critical of aspects of it (particularly in its most conservative incarnations). In particular, he was unable to forget the Concordat of July 1933 between the Vatican and the Nazis, signed by the future Pope Pius XII, which helped confer international legitimacy on the regime at an early stage in its development.
Böll's liberal views on religion and social issues inspired the wrath of conservatives in Germany. His 1972 article "Soviel Liebe auf einmal" ("So much love at once") which accused the tabloid "Bild" of falsified journalism, was in turn retitled, at the time of publishing and against Böll's wishes, by "Der Spiegel", and the imposed title was used as a pretext to accuse Böll of sympathy with terrorism. This particular criticism was driven in large part by his repeated insistence upon the importance of due process and the correct and fair application of the law in the case of the Baader-Meinhof Gang.
The conservative press even attacked Böll's 1972 Nobel prize award, arguing that it was awarded only to "liberals and left-wing radicals."
Influences.
Böll was deeply rooted in his hometown of Cologne, with its strong Roman Catholicism and its rather rough and drastic sense of humour. In the immediate post-war period, he was preoccupied with memories of the War and the effect it had—materially and psychologically—on the lives of ordinary people. He made them the heroes in his writing. His Catholicism was important to his work in ways that can be compared to writers such as Graham Greene and Georges Bernanos though, as noted earlier, his perspective was a critical and challenging one towards Catholicism rather than a merely passive one.
He was deeply affected by the Nazis' takeover of Cologne, as they essentially exiled him in his own town. Additionally, the destruction of Cologne as a result of the Allied bombing during World War II scarred him for life; he described the aftermath of the bombing in "The Silent Angel". Architecturally, the newly-rebuilt Cologne, prosperous once more, left him indifferent. (Böll seemed to be a pupil of William Morris – he let it be known that he would have preferred Cologne Cathedral to have been left unfinished, with the 14th-century wooden crane at the top, as it had stood in 1848). Throughout his life, he remained in close contact with the citizens of Cologne, rich and poor. When he was in hospital, the nurses often complained about the "low-life" people who came to see their friend Heinrich Böll.
His villains are the figures of authority in government, business, and in the Church, whom he castigates, sometimes humorously, sometimes acidly, for what he perceived as their conformism, lack of courage, self-satisfied attitude and abuse of power. His simple style made him a favourite for German-language textbooks in Germany and abroad.
Analysis.
His works have been dubbed "Trümmerliteratur" (the literature of the rubble). He was a leader of the German writers who tried to come to grips with the memory of World War II, the Nazis, and the Holocaust and the guilt that came with them. Because of his refusal to avoid writing about the complexities and problems of the past he was labelled by some with the role of 'Gewissen der Nation', in other words a catalyst and conduit for memorialisation and discussion in opposition to the tendency towards silence and taboo. This was a label that he himself was keen to jettison because he felt that it occluded a fair audit of those institutions which were truly responsible for what had happened.
He lived with his wife in Cologne and in the Eifel region. However, he also spent time on Achill Island off the west coast of Ireland. His cottage there is now used as a guesthouse for international and Irish artists. He recorded some of his experiences in Ireland in his book "Irisches Tagebuch" ("Irish Journal"); later on the people of Achill curated a festival in his honour. The Irish connection also influenced the translations into German by his wife Annemarie, which included works by Brendan Behan, J. M. Synge, G. B. Shaw, Flann O'Brien and Tomás Ó Criomhthain.
He was the president of the then West German P.E.N. and subsequently of the International P.E.N. organizations. He travelled frequently as a representative of the new, democratic Germany. His appearance and attitude were in complete contrast to the boastful, aggressive type of German which had become infamous all over the world during Hitler's rule. Böll was particularly successful in Eastern Europe, as he seemed to portray the dark side of capitalism in his books; his books were sold by the millions in the Soviet Union alone.
When Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn was expelled from the Soviet Union, he first took refuge in Heinrich Böll's Eifel cottage. This was in part the result of Böll's visit to the Soviet Union in 1962 with a cultural delegation, the first of several trips he made to the country, during which he built friendships with several writers and connections with many producers of dissident literature. Böll had previously recommended Solzhenitsyn for the Nobel Prize for Literature, under the auspices of his position in the West German P.E.N. When Solzhenitsyn was awarded the prize in 1976, he quoted from Böll's works to the reception committee.
In 1976, Böll publicly left the Catholic church, "without falling away from the faith".
Heinrich Böll died in 1985 at the age of 67.
Legacy and influence.
Böll's memory lives on, among other places, at the Heinrich Böll Foundation. A special Heinrich Böll Archive was set up in the Cologne Library to house his personal papers, bought from his family, but much of the material was damaged, possibly irreparably, when the building collapsed in March 2009.
His cottage in Ireland has been used as a residency for writers since 1992.
Selected bibliography.
Translations.
More than seventy translations of Annemarie and Heinrich Böll are listed in the bibliography published in 1995 by Werner Bellmann: poetical works of Brendan Behan, Eilis Dillon, O. Henry, Paul Horgan, Bernard Malamud, J. D. Salinger, George Bernard Shaw et al.

</doc>
<doc id="82385" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82385" title="Sex reassignment surgery">
Sex reassignment surgery

Sex reassignment surgery or SRS (also known as gender reassignment surgery, genital reconstruction surgery, sex realignment surgery, or, colloquially, a sex change) is the surgical procedure (or procedures) by which a transgender person's physical appearance and function of their existing sexual characteristics are altered to resemble that of their identified gender. It is part of a treatment for gender dysphoria in transgender people. Related genital surgeries may also be performed on intersex people, often in infancy. A 2013 statement by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture condemns the nonconsensual use of normalization surgery on intersex people.
Another term for SRS includes "sex reconstruction surgery," and more clinical terms, such as "feminizing genitoplasty" or "penectomy , orchiectomy, and vaginoplasty", are used medically for trans women, with "masculinizing genitoplasty", "metoidioplasty " or "phalloplasty" often similarly used for trans men.
People who pursue sex reassignment surgery are usually referred to as transsexual; "trans"—across, through, change; "sexual"—pertaining to the sexual characteristics (not sexual actions) of a person. More recently, people pursuing SRS may identify as transgender as well as transsexual.
While individuals who have undergone and completed SRS are sometimes referred to as "transsexed" individuals, the term "transsexed" is not to be confused with the term transsexual, which may also refer to individuals who have not undergone SRS, yet whose anatomical sex may not match their psychological sense of personal gender identity.
Scope and procedures.
The best known of these surgeries are those that reshape the genitals, which are also known as "genital reassignment surgery" or "genital reconstruction surgery" (GRS)- or "bottom surgery" (the latter is named in contrast to "top surgery", which is surgery to the breasts; bottom surgery does not refer to surgery on the buttocks in this context). However, the meaning of "sex reassignment surgery" has been clarified by the medical subspecialty organization, the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), to include any of a larger number of surgical procedures performed as part of a medical treatment for "gender dysphoria" or "transsexualism". According to WPATH, medically necessary sex reassignment surgeries include "complete hysterectomy, bilateral mastectomy, chest reconstruction or augmentation ... including breast prostheses if necessary, genital reconstruction (by various techniques which must be appropriate to each patient ...)... and certain facial plastic reconstruction." In addition, other non-surgical procedures are also considered medically necessary treatments by WPATH, including facial electrolysis.
A growing number of public and commercial health insurance plans in the United States now contain defined benefits covering sex reassignment-related procedures, usually including genital reconstruction surgery (MTF and FTM), chest reconstruction (FTM), breast augmentation (MTF), and hysterectomy (FTM). In June 2008, the American Medical Association (AMA) House of Delegates stated that the denial to patients with gender dysphoria or otherwise covered benefits represents discrimination, and that the AMA supports "public and private health insurance coverage for treatment for gender dysphoria as recommended by the patient's physician." Other organizations have issued similar statements, including WPATH, the American Psychological Association, and the National Association of Social Workers.
Differences between trans women and trans men SRS.
The array of medically necessary surgeries differs between trans women (male to female) and trans men (female to male). For trans women, genital reconstruction usually involves the surgical construction of a vagina, by means of penile inversion or the Sigmoid Colon Neo Vagina technique or more recently non-penile inversion techniques that provide greater resemblance to the genitals of genetic women, whereas in the case of trans men, genital reconstruction may involve construction of a penis through either phalloplasty or metoidioplasty. In both cases, for trans women and trans men, genital surgery may also involve other medically necessary ancillary procedures, such as orchiectomy, penectomy, mastectomy or vaginectomy.
As underscored by WPATH, a medically assisted transition from one sex to another may entail any of a variety of non-genital surgical procedures, any of which are considered "sex reassignment surgery" when performed as part of treatment for transsexualism. For trans men, these may include mastectomy (removal of the breasts) and chest reconstruction (the shaping of a male-contoured chest), or hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of ovaries and Fallopian tubes). For some trans women, facial feminization surgery, hair implants and breast augmentation are also aesthetic components of their surgical treatment.
Medical considerations.
People with HIV or hepatitis C may have difficulty finding a surgeon able to perform successful surgery. Many surgeons operate in small private clinics that cannot treat potential complications in these populations. Some surgeons charge higher fees for HIV and hepatitis C-positive patients; other medical professionals assert that it is unethical to deny surgical or hormonal treatments to transsexuals solely on the basis of their HIV or hepatitis status.
Other health conditions such as diabetes, abnormal blood clotting, and obesity do not usually present a problem to experienced surgeons. The conditions do increase the anesthetic risk and the rate of post-operative complications. Surgeons may require overweight patients to reduce their weight before surgery, any patients to refrain from hormone replacement before surgery and smoking patients to refrain from smoking before and after surgery. Surgeons commonly stipulate the latter regardless of the type of operation.
Potential future advances.
Medical advances may eventually make childbearing possible by using a donor uterus long enough to carry a child to term as anti-rejection drugs do not seem to affect the fetus. The DNA in a donated ovum can be removed and replaced with the DNA of the receiver. Further in the future, stem cell biotechnology may also make this possible, with no need for anti-rejection drugs.
Standards of care.
Sex reassignment surgery can be difficult to obtain, due to a combination of financial barriers and lack of providers. An increasing number of surgeons are now training to perform such surgeries. In many regions, an individual's pursuit of SRS is often governed, or at least guided, by documents called Standards of Care for the Health of Transsexual, Transgender, and Gender Nonconforming People (SOC). The most widespread SOC in this field is published and frequently revised by the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH, formerly the Harry Benjamin International Gender Dysphoria Association or HBIGDA). Many jurisdictions and medical boards in the United States and other countries recognize the WPATH Standards of Care for the treatment of transsexualism. For many individuals, these may require a minimum duration of psychological evaluation and living as a member of the target gender full-time, sometimes called the real life experience (RLE) (sometimes mistakenly referred to as the real life test (RLT)) before genital reconstruction or other sex reassignment surgeries are permitted.
Standards of Care usually give certain very specific "minimum" requirements as guidelines for progressing with treatment for transsexualism, including accessing cross-gender hormone replacement or many surgical interventions. For this and many other reasons, both the WPATH-SOC and other SOCs are highly controversial and often maligned documents among transgender patients seeking surgery. Alternative local standards of care exist, such as in the Netherlands, Germany, and Italy. Much of the criticism surrounding the WPATH/HBIGDA-SOC applies to these as well, and some of these SOCs (mostly European SOC) are actually based on much older versions of the WPATH-SOC. Other SOCs are entirely independent of the WPATH. The criteria of many of those SOCs are stricter than the latest revision of the WPATH-SOC. Many qualified surgeons in North America and many in Europe adhere almost unswervingly to the WPATH-SOC or other SOCs. However, in the United States many experienced surgeons are able to apply the WPATH SOC in ways which respond to an individual's medical circumstances, as is consistent with the SOC.
Most surgeons require two letters of recommendation for sex reassignment surgery. At least one of these letters must be from a mental health professional experienced in diagnosing gender identity disorder, who has known the patient for over a year. Letters must state that sex reassignment surgery is the correct course of treatment for the patient.
Many medical professionals and numerous professional associations have stated that surgical interventions should not be required in order for transsexual individuals to change sex designation on identity documents. However, depending on the legal requirements of many jurisdictions, transsexual and transgender people are often unable to change the listing of their sex in public records unless they can furnish a physician's letter attesting that sex reassignment surgery has been performed, in other instances legal gender change is prohibited even after genital or other surgery or treatment without recourse, while in other cases, such statutes may specify that genital surgery has been completed.
Physical consequences.
Patients of sex reassignment surgery may experience changes in their physical health and quality of life, the side effects of sex steroid treatment. Hence transexual people should be well informed of these risks before choosing to undergo SRS.
Several studies tried to measure the quality of life and self-perceive physical health using different scales. Overall, transexual people have rated their self-perceived quality of life as ‘normal’ or ‘quite good’, however, their overall score was still lower than the control group. Another study showed a similar level of quality of life in transsexual individuals and the control group. Nonetheless, a study with long-term data suggested that albeit quality of life of patients 15 years after sex reassignment surgery is similar to controls, their scores in the domains of physical and personal limitations were significantly lower. On the other hand, a research has found that quality of life of transexual patients could be enhanced by other variables. For instance, trans men obtained a higher self-perceived health score than women because they had a higher level of testosterone than them. Trans women who had undergone face feminization surgery have reported higher satisfaction in different aspects of their quality of life, including their general physical health. 
Psychological and social consequences.
After sex reassignment surgery, transsexuals (people who underwent cross-sex hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery) tend to be less gender dysphoric. They also normally function well both socially and psychologically. Anxiety, depression and hostility levels were lower after sex reassignment surgery. They also tend to score well for self-perceived mental health, which is independent from sexual satisfaction. Many studies have been carried out to investigate satisfaction levels of patients after sex reassignment surgery. Most of the patients have reported being very happy with the results and very few of the patients have expressed regret for undergoing sex reassignment surgery. Although studies have suggested that the positive consequences of sex reassignment surgery outweigh the negative consequences, there is still no conclusive evidence that sex reassignment surgery is clinically effective in improving the lives of transsexuals. It has been suggested that most studies investigating the outcomes of sex reassignment surgery are flawed as they have only included a small percentage of sex reassignment surgery patients in their studies. These methodological limitations such as lack of double blind randomised controls, small number of participants due to the rarity of transsexualism, high drop-out rates and low follow-up rates, tend to skew results and promote sex reassignment surgeries as beneficial. Persistent regret is one of the signs implying dissatisfaction after sex reassignment surgery. Regret may be due to unresolved gender dysphoria, or a weak and fluctuating sense of identity, and may even lead to suicide. Sex change regret is not rare and is suggested that one fifth of patients who underwent sex reassignment surgery experience sex change regret in the U.S and Holland, with 18% of patients committing suicide. Mortality rate associated with suicide, drug abuse and AIDS is also higher for transexuals after sex reassignment surgery than normal population in the Netherlands and Sweden. Many patients perceive the outcome of the surgery as not only medically but also psychologically important. Hence, it is suggested that psychological support is crucial for patients after sex reassignment surgery, which helps them feel accepted and have confidence in the outcome of the surgery.
Sexual satisfaction.
In general, the majority of the transsexual individuals have better sex lives and improved sexual satisfaction after sexual reassignment surgery. Most of the individuals have reported that they are able to experience sexual excitement during sexual activity, including during masturbation. Comparing sexes, females-to-male individuals have revealed better capabilities to attain orgasms and an increase in sexual excitement. A possible explanation for better satisfaction among transgender people who undergo SRS surgery is that these individuals previously possessed unwanted sex organs and rejected their bodies. As a result, they were not enthusiastic about engaging in sexual activity.
The ability to obtain orgasms is positively associated with sexual satisfaction. Frequencies and intensity of orgasms differ to a great extent among transsexual men and transsexual women after SRS. Almost all female-to-male individuals can achieve orgasms through sexual activity with a partner or via masturbation, whereas about 85% of the male-to-female individuals are able to achieve orgasms after SRS. In DeCypee et al. (2005)'s study on sexual health after SRS, most of the participants suggested that they are engaging in a transformation in their sexual excitement sensation. The female-to-male transgender individuals experienced intensified and stronger excitements, while male-to-female individuals encountered longer and more gentle feelings.
An increased frequency in masturbation is exhibited in most transsexual individuals after SRS. However, it is reported in a study that female-to-male individuals masturbated more often to male to female. The possible reasons for the differences in the rise in masturbation frequency could be associated with the surge of libido, caused by the impact of the testosterone therapy, or the stopping of gender dysphoria.
At birth.
Infants born with intersex conditions might undergo interventions at or close to birth. This is controversial because of the human rights implications.
History.
In Berlin in 1931, Dora Richter, became the first known transgender woman to undergo the vaginoplasty surgical approach.
This was followed by Lili Elbe in Dresden during 1930–1931. She started with the removal of her original sex organs, the operation supervised by Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld. Lili went on to have four more subsequent operations that included an unsuccessful uterine transplant, the rejection of which resulted in death. An earlier known recipient of this was Magnus Hirschfeld's housekeeper, but their identity is unclear at this time.
The Iranian government's response to homosexuality is to endorse, and fully pay for, sex reassignment surgery. The leader of Iran's Islamic Revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, issued a fatwa declaring sex reassignment surgery permissible for "diagnosed transsexuals". Eshaghian's documentary, "Be Like Others", chronicles a number of stories of Iranian gay men who feel transitioning is the only way to avoid further persecution, jail, and/or execution. The head of Iran's main transsexual organization, Maryam Khatoon Molkara—who convinced Khomeini to issue the fatwa on transsexuality—confirmed that some people who undergo operations are gay rather than transsexual.
Thailand is the country that performs the most sex reassignment surgeries, followed by Iran.
On 12 June 2003, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favor of Van Kück, a German trans woman whose insurance company denied her reimbursement for sex reassignment surgery as well as hormone replacement therapy. The legal arguments related to the Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights as well as the Article 8. This affair is referred to as "Van Kück vs Germany".
In 2011, Christiane Völling won the first successful case brought by an intersex person against a surgeon for non-consensual surgical intervention described by the International Commission of Jurists as "an example of an individual who was subjected to sex reassignment surgery without full knowledge or consent".
The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign joined a group of universities that includes sex reassignment surgery in its student health insurance. On March 6, 2014, the Board of Trustees approved to add the surgery to their student health insurance plan. According to Jodi S. Cohen, "the insurance will cover counseling, hormone therapy and surgery related to gender reassignment".

</doc>
<doc id="82386" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82386" title="Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania">
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania

Elizabethtown (Pennsylvania Dutch: "Betzischteddel") is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, southeast of Harrisburg. Small factories existed at the turn of the 20th century when the population in 1900 was 1,861. There was a slight increase in the next decade, with 1,970 people living in Elizabethtown in 1910. As of the 2000 census, the population of the borough was 11,887. Elizabethtown is commonly referred to in south-central Pennsylvania as "E-Town." This nickname is also used for the local college and high school.
History.
There are two stories about the origin of the town's name. In one version it is named after Elizabeth Reeby, wife of Michael Reeby who sold the first building lots here in about 1795. Another version has it named after the wife of Captain Barnabas Hughes who purchased The Black Bear Tavern in 1750.
The officially accepted history is that, in 1753, Captain Barnabas Hughes acquired land and laid out a town, naming it for his wife, Elizabeth. The early settlers were primarily Scots-Irish and Pennsylvania Dutch.
Elizabethtown became a borough in 1827, and a railroad was built through the area in the 1830s. The town was primarily agricultural until the early 1900s, when the Klein Chocolate Company (now part of Mars, Inc.) and several shoe factories (the last of which closed in 1979) opened. Elizabethtown College was established in 1899, and the Masonic Homes (now the Masonic Village) followed in 1910.
After World War II, Elizabethtown grew rapidly, more than doubling its population between 1950 and 2000. Homes and businesses expanded into nearby farmland, making sprawl, farmland preservation, and revitalizing the downtown area important issues.
The Kreider Shoe Manufacturing Company was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.
Public officials.
Borough Council.
Elizabethtown Borough Council has six members representing three voting wards. Each council member is elected to a four-year term. They are responsible for setting policy in every aspect of the Borough, including budgeting, public works, zoning, and ordinances.
Geography.
Elizabethtown is located at (40.153207, -76.600431).
The borough has a total area of , of which, of it is land and 0.38% is water.
Government and infrastructure.
The Pennsylvania Department of Corrections Training Academy is located in Mount Joy Township, near Elizabethtown.
Economy.
Elizabethtown is home to Continental Press, White Oak Mills (an animal feed plant), Elizabethtown College, the Masonic Village, a large Mars Chocolate North America(a division of Mars, Incorporated) plant and numerous smaller businesses..
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 11,887 people, 4,271 households, and 2,703 families residing in the borough. The population density was 4,567.4 people per square mile (1,765.2/km²). There were 4,483 housing units at an average density of 1,722.5 per square mile (665.7/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 96.32% White, 0.90% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 1.23% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.45% from other races, and 0.87% from two or more races. 1.45% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 4,271 households, out of which 28.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.2% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.7% were non-families. 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.88.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 19.3% under the age of 18, 18.8% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 17.1% from 45 to 64, and 18.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 82.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.5 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $42,752, and the median income for a family was $52,214. Males had a median income of $35,764 versus $26,316 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $18,384. About 3.3% of families and 5.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.7% of those under age 18 and 3.9% of those age 65 or over.
Education.
Public schools in Elizabethtown Borough are part of the Elizabethtown Area School District, though there are areas outside the borough that have Elizabethtown mailing addresses that are in neighboring school districts. Mount Calvary Christian School is also in the borough. Elizabethtown College, a private liberal arts institution, provides higher education.
Public media.
Town newspaper 
Transportation.
Elizabethtown is served by an Amtrak station, where all "Keystone Service" and "Pennsylvanian" trains stop. Bus service is provided by the Red Rose Transit Authority.

</doc>
<doc id="82387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82387" title="Ephrata, Pennsylvania">
Ephrata, Pennsylvania

Ephrata (English: , Pennsylvania Dutch: "Effridaa") is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States, south east of Harrisburg and about west by north of Philadelphia. It is named after Ephrath, a biblical town in what is now Israel. Ephrata's sister city is Eberbach, Germany, the city where its founders originated. In its early history, Ephrata was a pleasure resort and an agricultural community.
Ephrata's population has steadily grown over the last century. In 1900, 2,452 people lived there, in 1910, 3,192, and by 1940, the population had increased to 6,199. The population was 13,394 at the 2010 census. Ephrata is the most populous borough in Lancaster County.
History.
Ephrata is noteworthy for having been the former seat of the Mystic Order of the Solitary, a semimonastic order of Seventh-Day Dunkers. The community, which contained both men and women, was founded by Johann Conrad Beissel in 1732.
Many of the members were well-educated; Peter Miller, second prior of the monastery, translated the Declaration of Independence into seven languages, at the request of Congress. At the period of its greatest prosperity the community contained nearly 300 persons.
The Ephrata Commercial Historic District, Ephrata Cloister, Eby Shoe Corporation buildings, Connell Mansion, Mentzer Building, and Mountain Springs Hotel are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Geography.
Ephrata is located at (40.17870, -76.17744).
Like the rest of the county, it is mostly flat land suitable for farming.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , of which, of it is land and 0.28% is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 13,213 people, 5,477 households, and 3,565 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,672.7 people per square mile (1,417.1/km²). There were 5,672 housing units at an average density of 1,576.6 per square mile (608.3/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 96.10% White, 0.64% Black or African American, 0.26% Native American, 1.06% Asian, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 0.82% from other races, and 0.98% from two or more races. 2.75% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 5,477 households, out of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.6% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.9% were non-families. 28.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.94.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 24.0% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 32.1% from 25 to 44, 21.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.7 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $41,550, and the median income for a family was $48,213. Males had a median income of $35,095 versus $22,782 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $19,659. About 3.7% of families and 6.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.5% of those under age 18 and 7.4% of those age 65 or over.
Community Pool.
The Borough of Ephrata own and operate the Ephrata Community Pool which is located at 418 Vine Street. Currently, the pool is the oldest continuously operated swimming pool in Lancaster County, finishing its 84th year of operation in September 2015. A newly remodeled pool opened on May 26, 2012. This pool contains zero-depth entries, flume slides, and climbing walls among other things.
Schools.
Schools in Ephrata are part of Ephrata Area School District also known as E.A.S.D P.A
Economy.
Ephrata has a mix of large and small businesses of many types.
Religion.
Ephrata has a diverse mix of churches and faith groups, primarily Christian.
Public services.
The Ephrata Public Library, located on South Reading Road, is a member of the Library System of Lancaster County.
Law and government.
Ephrata is a borough. The current mayor of Ephrata is Mayor Ralph Mowen. His term expires in December 2017.
The name 'Ephrata' is also used to refer to the surrounding Ephrata Township, Pennsylvania.
Sister city.
Ephrata has one sister city, as designated by Sister Cities International: 
Tornado.
On Sunday, 29 March 2009, a strong storm briefly swept through Ephrata. On 31 March, the National Weather Service confirmed that it was an EF1 tornado. Strong hail came with it. Although there were no fatalities, 30 homes were damaged and 8 mobile homes were destroyed. Many vehicles could be seen on their side afterwards, and holes were put in houses from the hail.

</doc>
<doc id="82388" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82388" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania">
Lancaster, Pennsylvania

Lancaster (, ; Pennsylvania German: "Lengeschder") is a city located in South Central Pennsylvania which serves as the seat of Pennsylvania's Lancaster County and one of the oldest inland towns in the United States, (along with Springfield, Massachusetts; Petersburg, Virginia; Schenectady, New York, and several other early settlements). With a population of 59,322, it ranks eighth in population among Pennsylvania's cities. The Lancaster metropolitan area population is 507,766, making it the 101st largest metropolitan area in the US and 2nd largest in the South Central Pennsylvania area.
The city's primary industries include healthcare, tourism, public administration, manufacturing, both professional and semi-professional services, and home of the Park City Center shopping mall, the largest indoor retail facility in the region. Lancaster hosts more electronic public CCTV outdoor cameras per capita than cities such as Boston or San Francisco, despite controversy among residents. Lancaster was home to James Buchanan, the nation's 15th president, and to congressman and abolitionist Thaddeus Stevens.
History.
Originally called Hickory Town, the city was renamed after the English city of Lancaster by native John Wright. Its symbol, the red rose, is from the House of Lancaster. Lancaster was part of the 1681 Penn's Woods Charter of William Penn, and was laid out by James Hamilton in 1734. It was incorporated as a borough in 1742 and incorporated as a city in 1818.
During the American Revolution, Lancaster was the capital of the United States for one day, on September 27, 1777, after the Continental Congress fled Philadelphia, which had been captured by the British. The revolutionary government then moved still farther away to York, Pennsylvania.
Lancaster was capital of Pennsylvania from 1799 to 1812, after which the capital was moved to Harrisburg.
In 1851, the current Lancaster County Prison was built in the city, styled after Lancaster Castle in England. The prison remains in use, and was used for public hangings until 1912. It replaced a 1737 structure on a different site.
The first paved road in the United States was the former Philadelphia and Lancaster Turnpike, which makes up part of the present-day U.S. Route 30. Opened in 1795, the Turnpike connected the cities of Lancaster and Philadelphia, and was designed by a Scottish engineer named John Loudon McAdam. Lancaster residents are known to use the word ""macadam"" in lieu of pavement or asphalt. This name is a reference to the paving process named for McAdam.
The city of Lancaster was home to several important figures in American history. Wheatland, the estate of James Buchanan, the fifteenth President of the United States, is one of Lancaster's most popular attractions. Thaddeus Stevens, considered among the most powerful members of the United States House of Representatives, lived in Lancaster as an attorney. Stevens gained notoriety as a Radical Republican and for his abolitionism. The Fulton Opera House in the city was named for Lancaster native Robert Fulton, a renaissance man who created the first fully functional steamboat. All of these individuals have had local schools named after them.
After the American Revolution, the city of Lancaster became an iron-foundry center. Two of the most common products needed by pioneers to settle the Frontier were manufactured in Lancaster: the Conestoga wagon and the Pennsylvania long rifle. The Conestoga wagon was named after the Conestoga River, which runs through the city. The innovative gunsmith William Henry lived in Lancaster and was a U.S. congressman and leader during and after the American Revolution.
In 1803, Meriwether Lewis visited Lancaster to be educated in survey methods by the well-known surveyor Andrew Ellicott. During his visit, Lewis learned to plot latitude and longitude as part of his overall training needed to lead the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
In 1879, Franklin Winfield Woolworth opened his first successful "five and dime" store in the city of Lancaster, the F. W. Woolworth Company.
Lancaster was one of the winning communities for the All-America City award in 2000.
On October 13, 2011, Lancaster's City Council officially recognized September 27 as Capital Day, a holiday recognizing Lancaster's one day as capital of the United States in 1777.
Geography.
Lancaster is located at 40°02'23" North, 76°18'16" West (40.039860, −76.304366), and is above sea level.
The city is located about southeast of Harrisburg, west of Philadelphia, north-northeast of Baltimore and northeast of Washington, D.C.
The nearest towns and boroughs are Millersville (4.0 miles), Willow Street (4.8 miles), East Petersburg (5.3 miles), Lititz (7.9 miles), Landisville (8.6 miles), Mountville (8.8 miles), Rothsville (8.9 miles), and Leola (8.9 miles).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, of it is land and 0.14% is water.
Climate.
Lancaster has a Humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification "Dfa") with hot or very warm summers.
Demographics.
As of the 2010 census, the city was 55.2% White, 16.3% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 3.0% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian, and 5.8% were two or more races. 39.3% of the population were of Hispanic or Latino ancestry.
As of the census of 2000, there were 56,348 people, 20,933 households, and 12,162 families residing in the city. The population density was 7,616.5 people per square mile (2,940.0/km²). There were 23,024 housing units at an average density of 3,112.1 per square mile (1,201.3/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 61.55% White, 14.09% African American, 0.44% Native American, 2.46% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 17.44% from other races, and 3.94% from two or more races. 30.76% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Ethnic groups.
The largest ethnic groups in Lancaster as of recent estimates are :
In 2010, 29.2% of Lancaster residents were of Puerto Rican ancestry. The city has the second highest concentration of Puerto Ricans in Pennsylvania after Reading. For this reason, it is sometimes referred to as the "Spanish Rose." Lancaster celebrates its Puerto Rican heritage once every year with the Puerto Rican Festival.
The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute and Chabad teach Lancaster's residents.
There were 20,933 households, out of which 31.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 33.4% were married couples living together, 19.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.9% were non-families. 33.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.23.
In the city the population was spread out, with 27.5% under the age of 18, 13.9% from 18 to 24, 30.5% from 25 to 44, 17.7% from 45 to 64, and 10.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females there were 95.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.4 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $29,770, and the median income for a family was $34,623. Males had a median income of $27,833 versus $21,862 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,955. 21.2% of the population and 17.9% of families were below the poverty line. 29.2% of those under the age of 18 and 12.9% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line. Poverty in Lancaster is twice the state's average, and public school records list more than 900 children as homeless.
Economy.
There are also plans to convert an area of unused polluted industrial grounds (i.e., brownfields), which were once occupied by Armstrong World Industries, into playing fields for Franklin & Marshall College. This action is expected to take up most of the former industrial site. The Northwest Corridor will be developed with funds from Lancaster General Hospital. The hospital plans to create a mixed-use development which will add several city blocks to Lancaster’s grid.
Another brownfield site is Burle Business Park, the City's only commercial and industrial park. Devoted to adaptive re-use, this facility originally opened in 1942 as a U.S. Navy electronics research, development and manufacturing plant that was operated by RCA. The Navy facility was purchased after World War II by RCA. Burle Business Park was originally occupied by Burle Industries, the successor company to the RCA New Products Division following the 1986 acquisition of RCA by General Electric Company (GE). The GE acquisition of RCA resulted in the divestiture of this facility and the electronic business, but GE retained certain environmental liabilities that were subdivided into a separate parcel. Burle Industries is a major manufacturer of vacuum tube products, including photomultiplier tubes, power tubes, and imaging tubes. and is the largest U.S. manufacturer of photomultiplier tubes. Burle Industries has completed a voluntary clean-up under the Pennsylvania Land Recycling Program ("Act 2").
Shopping.
In addition to Lancaster's boutiques, vintage shops, and art galleries (Gallery Row), there is the Park City Center within the City of Lancaster, Lancaster County, the largest enclosed shopping center in South Central Pennsylvania. The mall includes an excess of 150 stores and is anchored by The Bon-Ton, Boscov's, JCPenney, Kohl's, and Sears. Park City opened in September 1971.
Built in 1889, the Lancaster Central Market is the oldest continuously operated farmers market in the United States, and many tourists come to purchase the handmade Amish goods that are not commonly found elsewhere. Central Market is also the center of the city's growing 'green' movement, allowing people to purchase organic and/or locally grown foods. Central Market is listed with the National Register of Historic Places, and its towers are of the Romanesque Revival style. The market underwent renovations beginning in July 2010, during which certain sections were closed off; though it remained in operation during this time.
Lancaster also has two outlet shopping centers, both of which are located in East Lampeter township on U.S. Route 30. Tanger Outlets is home to about 65 stores. Rockvale Outlets contains over 100 stores and restaurants as well as a Holiday Inn Express.
Top employers.
According to Lancaster's 2009 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:
Government.
Lancaster operates under a Mayor / Council form of Government. The City has a full range of services including Public Safety, Health, Housing, Parks, Streets & Highways, Water operations and Sewer operations. Rick Gray is the 43rd mayor of Lancaster city. The City Council is composed of seven members: President Louise B. Williams, Patricia A. Coller, Joseph R. Morales, Nelson M. Polite, Sr., Tim J. Roschel, Todd E. Smith, and Jose E. Urdaneta.
Fire Department.
The city of Lancaster is protected by the Lancaster City Bureau of Fire, which has a staff of 75. The City Bureau of Fire operates out of 3 fire stations, located throughout the city, as well as a maintenance facility. The Bureau operates a fire apparatus fleet of 3 engines, 1 truck, and a shift commander, as well as numerous special, support, and reserve units. The Bureau responds to approximately 3,250 emergency calls annually. The current Fire Chief is Tim Gregg.
Police Department.
The city of Lancaster is protected by the City of Lancaster Bureau of Police. Founded in 1865, the Bureau of Police is located at 39 W. Chestnut St. in Downtown Lancaster, and consists of approximately 147 sworn officers and 46 civilian employees. The Bureau of Police operates out of twelve sectors, or districts, and operates in four Divisions, including Patrol, Criminal Investigative, Administrative Services, and Contracted Services. The Bureau also remains the largest law enforcement agency in Lancaster County. The current Chief of Police is Keith R. Sadler.
Security camera controversy.
Not long after a police officer was wounded in a February 17, 2000 daytime shootout near the center of Lancaster's Penn Square, community residents, law enforcement, and elected officials sought viable solutions to rising crime in downtown. Addressing issues of public safety was a goal when the Lancaster County Crime Commission convened in August 2000. Public meetings and discussions were held over a two-year period. Among the seventeen recommendations in the Crime Commission's 2003 report was to explore the feasibility of a civilian-driven system of security cameras to support law enforcement and first responders.
Lancaster's citizens did not want to have a government- or police-operated system of cameras. The Lancaster Community Safety Coalition (LCSC) organized and was registered with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a nonprofit in 2004. Its goals included operating a video surveillance system, but it also developed to work on safety by design and community mobilization. Paid LCSC staff are background-checked by the FBI and trained to monitor the network of 164 closed-circuit TV cameras in the city of Lancaster. The community organization is also interested in stimulating economic development in downtown by creating a safe environment.
In 2009, the LCSC's expansion from a 70 to a 165-camera network attracted national attention, including a front page article in the "Los Angeles Times": "Lancaster, Pa., keeps a close eye on itself". The article quoted city police chief Keith Sadler as saying, "Years ago, there's no way we could do this...It brings to mind Big Brother, George Orwell and "1984." It's just funny how Americans have softened on these issues."
Prior to the "Los Angeles Times" article, there had been little public opposition to the CCTV camera system. Data showed it had contributed to the prosecution or prevention of several crimes. But, in response to the national coverage, a small but vocal group of opponents developed, who wanted to turn off the cameras, "possibly for good." The MSNBC commentator Keith Olbermann highlighted the issue in his 'Worst Person in the World' segment, criticizing the citizens for "spying on each other." ABC's "Nightline" and "CBS Evening News" also covered the citizen-operated surveillance system.
Politics.
Registered Democrats hold a 13,000 voter registration advantage over registered Republicans, as of June 2009. U.S. presidential candidate Barack Obama easily won the city of Lancaster, receiving 76% of the vote during the 2008 presidential election.
Federally, Lancaster is part of Pennsylvania's 16th congressional district, represented by Republican Joe Pitts, elected in 1996.
The state's senior member of the United States Senate is Democrat Bob Casey, elected in 2006. The state's junior member of the United States Senate is Republican Pat Toomey, elected in 2010. The Governor of Pennsylvania is Democrat Tom Wolf of neighboring York County, elected in 2014. Additionally, the city of Lancaster is the headquarters of the Constitution Party.
Lancaster was home to Democrat James Buchanan, the fifteenth president of the United States. Buchanan arrived in Lancaster in 1809 to practice law. He took up residence near the courthouse on N. Duke Street. In 1848 he purchased Wheatland, a Federal style mansion in the suburbs. He was elected President in 1856.
Transportation.
The Red Rose Transit Authority (RRTA) provides local bus transit to Lancaster City as well as surrounding areas in Lancaster County. RRTA is headquartered outside the City of Lancaster.
Bieber Tourways (formerly Capitol Trailways) provides intercity bus transit from the Lancaster Train and Bus Station to King of Prussia, Philadelphia, and New York City to the east, and York and Harrisburg to the west.
Amtrak also serves the Lancaster Train and Bus Station, located on the northernmost edge of the city at 53 East McGovern Avenue. The "Pennsylvanian", with service between Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, as well as the "Keystone Service", which runs from Harrisburg to New York via Philadelphia, both serve Lancaster.
The city is served by the Lancaster Airport, located six miles (10 km) north of downtown and just south of Lititz.
Lancaster is also a hub for automobile traffic, with many major roadways passing through or around the city, including US-30, US-222, PA-283, PA-72, and PA-272.
Historical landmarks.
Many of Lancaster's landmarks are significant in local, state, and national history.
Art and museums.
The city of Lancaster has art, craft and historical museums. The Demuth Museum is located in the former home of the well-known painter Charles Demuth, who had a national reputation in the 20th century. Additional art museums include the Lancaster Museum of Art and the Philips Museum of Art on the campus of Franklin & Marshall College. Art students at the state-of-the-art Pennsylvania College of Art and Design present their works at the academy's gallery, which is open to the public. LancasterARTS, a non-profit organization founded in 2002, promotes contemporary arts and crafts.
Lancaster city has a thriving art community. Gallery Row on the 100 block of North Prince St. features a block of art galleries, and the city proper has over 40 galleries and artists studios. The Galleries host a "First Friday" each month, extending business hours to exhibit new artwork and new artists to the public.
The Lancaster County Quilts and Textile Museum, completed in 2007, celebrates the art of the hand-sewn quilts and other textile items produced by women of the region's Amish and Mennonite communities. The Lancaster Mennonite Historical Society Museum and the Heritage Center Museum display artifacts and interpret the region's unique history. Children can have a hands-on experience with educational learning at the Hands-on House, also known as Children's Museum of Lancaster. Nature and geology-minded visitors can view the more earthly exhibits of the Louise Arnold Tanger Arboretum and the North Museum of Natural History and Science.
Upon completion, the Lancaster County Convention Center will incorporate the Stevens and Smith Historic Site. This museum that will include the preserved home of US Senator Thaddeus Stevens and his companion Lydia Hamilton Smith. In addition to its exhibits, the underground portion of the site will feature a recently discovered Underground Railroad feature: a converted water cistern used in the antebellum years to hide fugitive slaves on their way to freedom.
In Lancaster County, the Landis Valley Museum in Manheim Township has exhibits that interpret the county's history and culture, especially as a center of ethnic German Amish and Mennonite culture.
Sports.
Baseball.
The Barnstormers played their inaugural season in 2005, filling Lancaster's 44-year period without professional baseball since the demise of the Red Roses. Their main Atlantic League rival is the Revolution from nearby York.
Lancaster is the hometown of the Major League Baseball alumnus, Tom Herr. He played for the Philadelphia Phillies, the New York Mets, and the San Francisco Giants before ending his career with the St. Louis Cardinals. Herr subsequently coached the Hempfield High School Black Knights baseball team for several years. He also managed the Lancaster Barnstormers in their first season. In 2006, Herr led the club to their first-ever Atlantic League championship over the Bridgeport Bluefish.
Cycling.
The Lancaster Bicycle Club hosts an annual Covered Bridge Metric Century bicycle race. In 2010, more than 2,500 riders participated.
The city of Lancaster hosted the Tom Bamford Lancaster Classic, an international, professional bicycle racing event held each June since 1992. It was part of the 2006–2007 UCI America Tour and the 2007 USA Cycling Professional Tour.
Golf.
Professional golf is well represented by the Professional Golf Association's Jim Furyk. He placed 4th in the 1998 and 2003 Masters tournament, won the 2003 U.S. Open, placed 4th in the 1997, 1998, and 2006 British Open, and placed 6th in the 1997 PGA championship. Furyk also won the Vardon Trophy in 2006. He is an alumnus of Manheim Township High School, located in the immediate suburb of Manheim Township.
The 2015 U.S. Women's Open was held at the Lancaster Country Club.
Soccer.
The Women's Premier Soccer League added the Lancaster Inferno in the 2008 season. The WPSL is a FIFA-recognized Division IV league, and is also included in the fourth tier of the American soccer pyramid. The Inferno is owned by the Pennsylvania Classics organization and play their home games at the Hempfield High School stadium in Landisville. The Inferno's colors are black and white.
Field Hockey.
In 2013, USA Field Hockey announced their intentions to move its national training center for the United States women's national field hockey team to Lancaster County. They have signed with Spooky Nook Sports through 2022 after searching for many years for a Northeastern site.
Amateur sports in Lancaster.
Lancaster's suburban area hosts several amateur sports teams. Ice hockey is represented by the Central Penn Panthers, a member of the junior-level Atlantic Metropolitan Hockey League, and both the Lancaster Firebirds, and Regency Panthers youth amateur ice hockey organization of the USA Hockey's Atlantic District. American football is represented by the Lancaster Lightning, a member of the semi-professional North American Football League, that plays in nearby Kinzers. A close cousin of American football, rugby, is represented by the Roses Rugby Football Club of the Mid Atlantic Rugby Football Union, of which the Roses RFC are the 2005 champion. Roller derby is represented by the Dutchland Derby Rollers, an all-female roller derby team which plays to raise money for various charities, currently ranked #23 in the world by Derby News Network.
Historical Lancaster teams.
The Lancaster Red Roses of the Eastern Professional Baseball League are the most well-known of Lancaster's defunct teams. They played from 1906 to 1909, and from 1940 to their last season in 1961. The Red Roses were called the "Lancaster Maroons" from 1896 to 1899 and the "Lancaster Red Sox" in 1932.
The "Lancaster Red Roses" was also the name of a basketball franchise in the Continental Basketball Association (at that time, the Eastern Professional Basketball League) from 1946 to 1949, and from 1953 to 1955. The CBA later hosted another Lancaster team called the Lightning from 1981 to 1985. The Lightning later moved to Rockford, Illinois, where they played until the 2007 season. The Storm of the Eastern Basketball Alliance played from 1997 to 2000, winning the league championship in 1999. The last professional basketball team to call Lancaster home was the Liberty, who played as a member of the now-defunct Global Professional Basketball League in 2009.
Education.
Education in Lancaster is provided by many private and public institutions. The School District of Lancaster runs the city's public schools. The local high school campuses are McCaskey and McCaskey East. Established in 1836, it is the second oldest school district in Pennsylvania. Lancaster Catholic High School has a long history in the county; it was founded in 1926. It currently falls under the jurisdiction of the diocese of Harrisburg. With a P-12 enrollment of more than 500 students, Lancaster Country Day School is one of the region's largest independent nonsectarian schools. Founded in 1908 as the Shippen School for Girls, the school became coeducational and relocated from downtown Lancaster to its Hamilton Road address in 1949. La Academia Partnership Charter School, opened in 1998 serves grades 6-12. The school is the only public charter in Lancaster County and is open to any student residing in the county. Manheim Township School District is a four-year public high school located in Lancaster Pennsylvania. It is the only high school in the Manheim Township School District. It is supported by a 7th and 8th grade middle school, a 5th and 6th grade intermediate school, and five elementary schools. In 2008, Manheim Township High School was named one of the Top 505 High Schools in the nation by US World and News Report. It is also known for graduating professional golfer Jim Furyk.
On May 13, 2015, Lancaster City was named the number one best city in the country to be a teacher by GoodCall. The top 10 list was based on average annual teacher salary, available teaching jobs, teaching jobs per capita, high school graduation rates, cost of living and amenities. Data was gathered from the U.S. Census, Indeed.com, the National Center for Education Statistics, and WalkScore.com.
Lancaster area hosts several colleges and universities including: Consolidated School of Business, Franklin & Marshall College, Lancaster General College of Nursing & Health Sciences, Lancaster Theological Seminary, Lancaster Bible College, Pennsylvania College of Art and Design, Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology, Millersville University of Pennsylvania, Central Pennsylvania College, and the Harrisburg Area Community College.
Local businesses.
The businesses that are based in the vicinity of Lancaster include: Armstrong World Industries, Auntie Anne's, Fulton Bank, Fulton Financial Corporation, Herley Industries, Isaac's Restaurant & Deli, Kunzler & Company, Inc., Lancaster Brewing Company, Lancaster Laboratories, MapQuest, Opening Day Partners, Y&S Candies division of The Hershey Company, and the Lancaster Caramel Company (the original parent company of the Hershey Company). Notable nonprofit organizations include Hope International and Water Street Ministries.

</doc>
<doc id="82389" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82389" title="Mount Joy, Pennsylvania">
Mount Joy, Pennsylvania

Mount Joy is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 7,410 at the 2010 census.
Name and origin.
Mount Joy is often named in lists of "delightfully-named towns" in Pennsylvania Dutch Country, along with Intercourse, Blue Ball, Lititz, Bareville, Bird-in-Hand and Paradise.
The name is often shortened to Mt Joy, as in Mencken (1963), The town was named after the ship the early Irish settlers came to America on; "Mount Joy".
Geography.
Mount Joy is located at (40.109895, -76.510977).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of 2.3 square miles (6.1 km²), all of it land. It is considered to be part of the Susquenanna Valley.
Demographics.
The 2010 United States Census reports the following demographics for Mount Joy Borough:

</doc>
<doc id="82390" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82390" title="Dirty Weekend (1993 film)">
Dirty Weekend (1993 film)

Dirty Weekend is a British film directed by Michael Winner, based on the novel of the same name by Helen Zahavi. It was banned from video release for two years by the BBFC for its violent and sexual content.
Synopsis.
Set in the coastal town of Brighton, England, "Dirty Weekend" follows the story of Bella (Lia Williams), a mild-mannered secretary who works from home in a basement flat. Soon, she finds herself the victim of Tim (Rufus Sewell), a voyeur who watches her through her windows and plagues her with obscene phone calls in which he threatens to assault and rape her. After the police refuse to offer any assistance, Bella visits Nimrod (Ian Richardson), an Iranian clairvoyant who suggests that she take matters into her own hands.
That night, Bella breaks into Tim’s flat while he is sleeping and batters him to death with a claw hammer. Empowered, Bella embarks on a dirty weekend in which she slaughters six more men by a variety of methods. Ultimately, she evades capture by the authorities and prepares to carry on her murderous rampage in the large, faceless city of London.
Production.
Filming took place in the Notting Hill and Kensington areas of London and also in Brighton. However, the Internet Movie Database lists other locations. The gun shop scenes were filmed at Park Street Guns near St. Albans, Hertfordshire; the country pub (now demolished) was the Grenville Lodge, East Burnham (Burnham Beeches) Buckinghamshire; and the dentist scenes were shot at a real dental practice in Twickenham, Greater London.
Theft of equipment was a problem during filming. While filming in Brighton, all the catering equipment was stolen and in Notting Hill Gate, a mobile kitchen with generator was stolen.
Critical Reception.
"Halliwell's Film Guide" described "Dirty Weekend" as "a sleazy little tale of a female vigilante, directed and acted in a perfunctory, over-emphatic manner". Sheila Johnston's assessment of "Dirty Weekend" was also negative: "no window-dressing can hide the fact that an aura of indelible naffness hangs over the movie...the screenplay is hewn out from Helen Zahavi's over-written novel with no concessions to the way people actually speak". Johnston argued "Dirty Weekend" was inferior to other female revenge films such as "Ms. 45" and "Lipstick". Johnston also criticised the making up of the white actor Richardson with "brownface" to portray a Middle Easterner. "The Observer" review claimed "Dirty Weekend" has "a certain factitious topicality", but went on to state "a work so bad in every way, and mostly risibly so, cannot be the focus of serious controversy". Brian Case, reviewing the film for "Time Out", dismissed "Dirty Weekend" as "pretty rotten", and criticised Winner's direction, stating it resembled "out-takes from local cinema advertising, which distances the audience from the material and indeed from wakefulness itself".

</doc>
<doc id="82392" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82392" title="MetaComCo">
MetaComCo

MetaComCo (MCC) was a computer systems software company started in 1981 and based in Bristol, England by Peter Mackeonis and Derek Budge. A division of Tenchstar, Ltd.
MetaComCo's first product was an MBASIC compatible interpreter for IBM PC's, which was licensed by Peter Mackeonis to Digital Research in 1982, and issued as the Digital Research Personal Basic, or PBASIC, running under CP/M. Other computer languages followed, also licensed by Digital Research and MetaComCo established an office in Pacific Grove, California, to service their USA customers.
In 1984 Dr. Tim King joined the company, bringing with him a version of the operating system TRIPOS for the Motorola 68000 processor which he had previously worked on whilst a researcher at the University of Cambridge.
This operating system was used as the basis of AmigaDOS (file-related functions of AmigaOS); MetaComCo won the contract from Commodore because the original planned Amiga disk operating system called Commodore Amiga Operating System (CAOS) was behind schedule; timescales were incredibly tight and TRIPOS provided a head start for a replacement system.
MetaComCo also developed ABasiC for the Amiga which was initially provided with Amigas. Much to Commodore's annoyance MetaComCo also worked with Atari to produce the BASIC that was initially provided with the Atari ST — ST BASIC.
The company also sold the Lattice C compiler for the Sinclair QL and the Atari ST and range of other languages (e.g. Pascal, BCPL) for m68k-based computers. MetaComCo also represented LISP and REDUCE software from the RAND Corporation.
Several of the team at MetaComCo went on to found Perihelion Software. Mackeonis founded Triangle Publishing, the software publishing company responsible for creating the ST Organizer for the Atari ST and PC Organizer and "Counterpoint" (a GUI system) for Amstrad Computers and GoldStar computers.

</doc>
<doc id="82394" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82394" title="Julio César Chávez">
Julio César Chávez

Julio César Chávez González (; July 12, 1962), also known as Julio César Chávez Sr., is a Mexican former professional boxer. He is considered by acclamation as the greatest Mexican fighter of all time and one of the greatest boxers of all time.
Chávez is a six-time world champion in three weight divisions, and for several years was considered the best pound for pound fighter in the world. In a career that spanned over 25 years, Chávez won the WBC super featherweight title in 1984, the WBA and WBC lightweight titles in 1987 and 1988, the WBC light welterweight title in 1989 and 1994, and the IBF light welterweight title in 1990. Chávez was named the 1990 Fighter of the Year by "The Ring" magazine.
He holds records for the most successful defenses of world titles (27), most title fight victories (31), most title fights (37), and the second most title defenses won by knockout (21, after Joe Louis with 23). Chávez also has the longest undefeated streak in boxing history: 13 years. Chávez's record was 89–0–1 going into his first official loss to Frankie Randall in 1994, before which he had an 87-fight win streak until his draw with Pernell Whitaker in 1993. Chávez also set the record for the largest attendance for a boxing match, with 132,274 people at the Estadio Azteca for his fight against Greg Haugen in 1993.
Chávez was known for his outstanding punching power, devastating body attack, remarkably strong chin and the relentless stalking of his opponents. He ranks #24 on ESPN's list of "50 Greatest Boxers of All Time". On December 7, 2010, he was inducted in the prestigious International Boxing Hall of Fame for the Class of 2011. He is the father of prospect Omar Chávez and former middleweight champion Julio César Chávez, Jr.
Early life.
Julio César Chávez was born on July 12, 1962 in Ciudad Obregón, Sonora, Mexico. His father, Rodolfo Chavez, worked for the railroad, and Julio grew up in an abandoned railroad car with his five sisters and four brothers. Chávez came from a poor family and became a boxer for money, he stated: "I saw my mom working, ironing, and washing people's clothes, and I promised her I would give her a house someday and she would never have that job again." He began boxing as an amateur at the age of 16 and he then moved to Tijuana to pursue a professional career.
Career.
Chávez made his professional debut at age 17. In his 12th fight, on March 4, 1980, Chávez faced Miguel Ruiz in Culiacán, Sinaloa. At the end of the first round, Chavez landed a blow that knocked Ruiz out. Delivered as the bell sounded, the blow was ruled a disqualification in the ring and Ruiz was declared the winner. The next day, however, his manager, Ramón Felix, consulted with the Mexican boxing commission, and after further review, the result was overturned and Chávez was declared the winner.
Chávez won his first championship, the vacant WBC Super Featherweight title, on September 13, 1984, by knocking out fellow Mexican Mario "Azabache" Martínez at the Grand Olympic Auditorium in Los Angeles, California. Martínez had been the betting favorite in the bout, due partly to his previous victory over former WBC world champion Rolando Navarette in a non-title bout. On April 19, 1985, Chávez defended his title against number one ranked contender Ruben Castillo (63-4-2) by knocking him out in the sixth round. On July 7, 1985, Chavez defeated former and future champion Roger Mayweather via a second round knockout. On August 3, 1986, Chavez won a twelve round majority decision over former WBA and future IBF Super Featherweight champion Rocky Lockridge in Monte Carlo, Monaco. In his next bout, he defeated former champion Juan Laporte by a twelve round unanimous decision. On March 18, 1987, he defeated number one ranked challenger Francisco Tomas Da Cruz (27-1-0) by third round knockout. He successfully defended his WBC Super Featherweight title a total of nine times.
Lightweight.
On November 21, 1987, Chávez moved up to the lightweight division and faced WBA Lightweight Champion Edwin Rosario. Prior to the bout, there were concerns about how Chávez would handle the move up in weight against the hard punching Puerto Rican. Chávez commented, "Everything I've accomplished as champion, and the nine title defenses, would be thrown away with a loss to Rosario." The two fighters nearly exchanged blows during a press conference after Rosario threatened to send Chávez back to Mexico in a coffin. Chávez would ultimately give a career-defining performance as he defeated Rosario by an eleventh round TKO to win the title. HBO Punchstat showed Rosario landing 263 of 731 punches thrown in the fight (36%) and Chavez 450 of 743 (61%). After the bout, "Sports Illustrated" ran the headline, "Time To Hail César: WBA Lightweight Champion César Chávez of Mexico may be the world's best fighter."
On April 16, 1988, Chávez defeated number one ranked contender Rodolfo Aguilar (20-0-1) by sixth round technical knockout. On June 4, 1988, he won against former two-time champion Rafael Limón by scoring a seventh round TKO. Later that year, he unified the WBA and WBC belts by a technical decision win over champion José Luis Ramírez. An accidental head-butt opened a cut on Ramírez's forehead and the doctor halted the fight, sending the decision to the judges' scorecards at that point in the fight. Chávez, ahead on all scorecards, was declared the winner. He was also awarded the "The Ring" Lightweight title after the victory.
Chavez vacated his WBA and WBC Lightweight titles in order to move up to the super lightweight division.
Light Welterweight.
In his next bout, he won the WBC Light Welterweight title by defeating Roger Mayweather for a second time. Mayweather did not come out of his corner after the tenth round, giving Chavez the TKO win. In 1989, Chávez defeated future champion Sammy Fuentes by tenth round TKO. In his next bout, he handed Alberto de las Mercedes Cortes (44-0) his first career loss by scoring a third round knockout.
Chávez vs. Taylor.
On March 17, 1990, he faced Meldrick Taylor, the undefeated IBF Light Welterweight Champion, in a title unification fight. While Taylor carried the fight to Chavez through round 8, Julio rallied in the last four rounds. With about 30 seconds left in the 12th round, he landed a hard straight right hand on the chin of Taylor, which hurt him badly. Shortly thereafter, he knocked down the former olympian. Although Taylor rose at the referee's count of six, he failed to respond coherently to referee Richard Steele's questions and continued to hold onto the ropes in the corner, resulting in Steele stopping the fight with only two seconds remaining. Many boxing fans and members of the media were outraged that Steele would stop a match that Taylor was winning with only two seconds left, while others felt that Steele was justified in stopping the fight given Taylor's condition and the fact that he was unable to respond to Steele before the conclusion of the match. Steele defended his decision by saying that his concern is protecting a fighter, regardless of how much time is left in the round or the fight. As Steele put it, "I stopped it because Meldrick had took a lot of good shots, a lot of hard shots, and it was time for it to stop. You know, I'm not the timekeeper, and I don't care about the time. When I see a man that has had enough, I'm stopping the fight." "The Ring" named it the "Fight of the Year" for 1990 and later the "Fight of the Decade" for the 1990s. While many hoped for an immediate rematch, Taylor moved up in weight in his next bout and the fighters did not meet again until 1994, when Chávez dominated and knocked out a faded Taylor in eight rounds.
After unifying the titles, Chávez engaged in a busy series of title defenses and non-title fights. On December 8, 1990, he defeated the WBC mandatory challenger Kyung-Duk Ahn (29-1) by third round knockout. On March 18, 1991, he defeated WBC number four ranked fighter John Duplessis (34-1) by fourth round TKO. On September 14, 1991, Chávez won a twelve round unanimous decision over former champion Lonnie Smith. On April 10, 1992, he scored a TKO victory over number one ranked contender Angel Hernandez (37-0-2, 22 KOs) in the fifth round. Later that year, he defeated Frankie Mitchell (29-1) by fourth round TKO.
Chávez vs. Camacho.
On September 12, 1992, Chávez faced WBO Light Welterweight Champion Hector "Macho" Camacho (41-1-0, 18 KOs) in a highly anticipated bout. Chávez dominated Camacho en route to a unanimous decision win. The final scores were 117-111, 119-110 and 120-107 for Chávez. After the fight, on his arrival to Mexico, the President Carlos Salinas de Gortari sent the special car for the Pope to take him from the airport to the President's house.
Chávez vs. Haugen.
His 1993 fight with Greg Haugen featured trash talk from Haugen, who derided Chavez's 82-fight unbeaten streak as consisting mostly of "Tijuana taxi drivers that my mother could have knocked out" and insisting that "There aren't 130,000 Mexicans who can afford tickets" to see the fight in Estadio Azteca. Chávez responded by saying, "I really hate him bad. When he looks at me, I want to vomit. I am going to give him the worst beating of his life; I am going to make him swallow the words that came out of his dirty mouth." Haugen was proven wrong on both counts: 132,274 showed up to set a record for fight attendance and they watched Chávez drop Haugen quickly and then back off with the apparent intention of punishing him for his prefight remarks. However, the referee had seen enough by the fifth round and stopped it for a TKO victory for Chávez. After the fight, Chávez commented to Haugen; "Now you know I don't fight with taxi drivers" and a bloodied Haugen sportingly responded, "They must have been tough taxi drivers." Later that year, Chávez scored a sixth-round TKO victory over number one ranked contender Terrence Alli.
Draw with Whitaker and first career loss.
After a division record 18 consecutive defenses of his light welterweight title, Chávez (87–0) moved up one more weight division to challenge Pernell Whitaker (32–1) for his WBC Welterweight title in September 1993. Since the late 1980s, Chávez stated several times that he wanted a fight against Whitaker. The Whitaker team, among them Lou Duva, told to "Ring Magazine" that they did not want a fight against Chavez in those days. In the eyes of many experts, Whitaker waited for Chávez to age. The result of the fight was a controversial majority draw, allowing Chávez to remain undefeated with Whitaker retaining his title. Various members of the American media, including "The Ring" Magazine and "Sports Illustrated", were critical of the decision. "Sports Illustrated" put Pernell Whitaker on the cover of its next magazine with a one word title, "Robbed!" Chávez stated after the fight: "I felt I was forcing the fight ... he just kept holding me too much, he was throwing too many low blows too." There was no rematch.
Chavez continued defending his Light Welterweight title and on December 18, 1993, he defeated British Commonwealth Light Welterweight Champion Andy Holligan (21–0–0) by fifth round TKO. Chávez faced Frankie Randall in January 1994, in a fight that most expected him to win easily. Instead, Randall knocked him down for the first time in his career and went on to win a split decision and Chávez lost the title to Randall. Chávez blamed his loss on referee Richard Steele, who deducted two points from Chávez for low blows, which affected the difference on the scorecards. The WBC ordered an immediate rematch and Chávez regained the title on a split technical decision in May 1994. The fight was fiercely contested when they collided heads, opening a large cut over Chávez's eyebrow in the seventh round. After the head cut, during round eight, the referee called for the doctor, who then stopped the fight. Under WBC rules, Randall lost one point, giving Chávez the technical victory. The two faced one another in a rubber match 10 years later, which Chávez won.
Chavez then faced Meldrick Taylor in a rematch, four years after their historic first fight. Chavez defeated him in the eighth round by a knockout that sent Taylor from one side of the ring to the other. In his next bout, Chavez defeated three-time champion Tony Lopez. In 1995, he defeated former and future Light Welterweight Champion Giovanni Parisi. Later that year, he defended his title against number one ranked challenger David Kamau, despite suffering a cut in the opening round. Prior to the bout, Chavez indicated that he was considering retirement, "I've had a lot of problems with my arms, with my knees. I really don't want to extend myself much longer," Chávez said. "After so many years of working out, it all builds up. I am not giving what I used to be able to give. I will fight De La Hoya for a lot of money, and then retire."
Chávez vs. De La Hoya.
On June 7, 1996, Chávez faced Oscar De La Hoya. A large gash appeared over the right eye of Chávez within the first minute of the first round, leading many to assume what Chávez later confirmed—that the cut occurred earlier in training and was re-opened in the bout. Heavy blood flow prompted the doctor to stop the fight in the fourth round. Until their eventual rematch in 1998, Chávez would always state that De La Hoya had not defeated him, but that a gash that he had suffered in training was the real cause of the stoppage of the fight. In his next bout, Chávez defeated former champion Joey Gamache in his 100th career bout.
A year after De La Hoya moved up to welterweight in 1997, Chávez fought Miguel Ángel González for the vacant WBC Light Welterweight title. That fight ended in a draw. In a rematch with De La Hoya for the WBC Welterweight belt in September 1998, De La Hoya won by 8th round TKO. About De La Hoya, Chávez stated years after: "I have nothing against him, even though he beat me twice. I have no resentment towards him... De la Hoya was younger than me during our fight, and I was on my way out of boxing. If Oscar didn't fight me, he would not have been anything in boxing." Chavez spoke about his sparring session with De La Hoya six years before their first fight and stated: "I sparred with him and dropped him in the second round with a right hand. De la Hoya was a kid... that day after training he stayed and we went out to dinner, I gave him some $300-$400 from my pocket to help him out."
Retirement and farewell fights.
Chavez won his first two bouts in 1999 before losing to then 32-year-old Willy Wise via 10 round unanimous decision. In 2000, at the age of 38, Chávez challenged Light Welterweight Champion Kostya Tszyu. Chavez lost the bout via 6th round TKO. After a 2001 victory over Terry Thomas in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, Chávez retired. However, on November 24, 2003, he came out of retirement to avenge his earlier loss to Willy Wise, knocking Wise out in two rounds in Tijuana, Mexico. In April 2004, Chávez went back into the ring, for what he again claimed would be his last appearance. In that fight, nicknamed "Adiós, México, Gracias" ("Good-bye, Mexico, Thank you"), he beat his former conqueror, Frankie Randall, by a ten round decision. On May 28, 2005, Chávez once again stepped into a boxing ring, outpointing Ivan Robinson in ten rounds at the Staples Center.
On September 17, 2005, at the U.S. Airways Center in Phoenix, Arizona, Chávez suffered a TKO loss to little-known Grover Wiley in the 115th bout of his career, retiring in his corner before the start of the 5th round, after injuring his right hand. After the bout, Chávez told his promoter, Bob Arum, that this time he was definitely retiring from boxing. His defeat was avenged two years later by his son, Julio César Chávez, Jr., who knocked Wiley out in the third round of their fight.
Personal life.
During the late part of his career, Chávez struggled with drug addiction and alcohol abuse. He stated that he started drinking the night after his fight against Edwin Rosario. He later developed a cocaine habit. Chávez got into rehab several times until he recovered. Nowadays he remains sober, in shape, training and weighs around .
Chávez is the father of prospect Omar Chávez and former WBC Middleweight Champion Julio César Chávez, Jr. He works as an analyst for ESPN and Azteca, and spends his time between Mexico and the United States, where he owns businesses and properties.
Career in review.
Chávez won six world titles in three weight divisions: WBC Super Featherweight (1984), WBA Lightweight (1987), WBC Lightweight (1988), WBC Light Welterweight (1989), IBF Light Welterweight (1990) and WBC Light Welterweight (1994) for the second time. He was also awarded the "The Ring" Lightweight Championship in 1988. World champions whom Chávez defeated include Jose Luis Ramírez, Rafael Limón, Rocky Lockridge, Meldrick Taylor, Roger Mayweather, Lonnie Smith, Sammy Fuentes, Héctor "Macho" Camacho, Juan Laporte, Edwin Rosario, Greg Haugen, Tony López, Giovanni Parisi, Joey Gamache and Frankie Randall, who had taken the WBC Light Welterweight belt from Chávez just four months earlier. He lost to only three champions: Randall, Oscar De La Hoya and Kostya Tszyu. He was held to a draw by two others: Pernell Whitaker and Miguel Ángel González.
Chávez finally retired in his 25th year as a professional boxer with a record of 107 wins, 6 losses and 2 draws, with 86 knockouts and is considered one of the greatest fighters of all times. He holds records for most successful consecutive defenses of world titles (27), most title fights (37), most title-fight victories (31) and he is after Joe Louis (with 23) for most title defenses won by knockout (21). Chávez also has the longest undefeated streak in boxing history, 13 years. His record was 89-0-1 going into his first loss to Frankie Randall and had an 87 fight win streak until his draw with Whitaker. He was ranked #50 on "Ring" Magazine's list of "100 greatest punchers of all time." As an in-fighter or swarmer, Julio César Chávez was renowned specially for his devastating left hook and his extremely strong chin. Former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, stated that Chávez is one of the greatest fighters of his generation and top five of all time from his point of view. Trainer Angelo Dundee said that Chávez had one of the strongest chin in boxing history. In 2002, "The Ring" ranked Chávez as the 18th greatest fighter of the last 80 years. On December 7, 2010, his induction to the International Boxing Hall of Fame was announced.
Titles in boxing.
"Major World Titles:"
"The Ring/Lineal Championship Titles:"

</doc>
<doc id="82403" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82403" title="Ranger 3">
Ranger 3

Ranger 3 was a space exploration mission conducted by NASA to study the Moon. The Ranger 3 robotic spacecraft was launched January 26, 1962 as part of the Ranger program. Due to a series of malfunctions, the spacecraft missed the Moon by and entered a heliocentric orbit.
The Ranger 3 space probe was designed to transmit pictures of the lunar surface during a period of 10 minutes of flight prior to impacting on the Moon, to rough-land a seismometer capsule on the Moon, to collect gamma-ray data in flight, to study radar reflectivity of the lunar surface, and to continue testing of the Ranger program for development of lunar and interplanetary spacecraft.
Spacecraft design.
Ranger 3 was the first of the Block II Ranger designs. The basic vehicle was 3.1 m high and consisted of a lunar capsule covered with a balsa wood impact-limiter, 650 mm in diameter, a mono-propellant mid-course motor, a retrorocket with a thrust of 5080 pounds force (22.6 kN), and a gold- and chrome-plated hexagonal base 1.5 m in diameter. A large high-gain dish antenna was attached to the base. Two wing-like solar panels (5.2 m across) were attached to the base and deployed early in the flight. Power was generated by 8680 solar cells contained in the solar panels which charged an 11.5 kg 1 kW·h capacity AgZn launching and backup battery. Spacecraft control was provided by a solid-state computer and sequencer and an earth-controlled command system. Attitude control was provided by Sun and Earth sensors, gyroscopes, and pitch and roll jets. The telemetry system aboard the spacecraft consisted of two 960 MHz transmitters, one at 3 W power output and the other at 50 mW power output, the high-gain antenna, and an omnidirectional antenna. White paint, gold and chrome plating, and a silvered plastic sheet encasing the retrorocket furnished thermal control.
During prelaunch preparations for Ranger 1, the spacecraft's timer had accidentally been started which led to the deployment of the solar panels inside the payload shroud. It was decided that ground testing of the onboard instruments would not be done on the Block II spacecraft because they had a functional midcourse correction engine and if a similar incident happened with them, the squibs and pyrotechnics used to deploy the solar panels could inadvertently ignite the propellants in the onboard engine, which could result in the explosion of the spacecraft on the pad and possibly take the entire launch vehicle with it. JPL officials announced that factory testing of the Ranger's systems was sufficient to root out any problems and any hardware which failed to pass the tests was not fit to fly.
The experimental apparatus included: (1) a vidicon television camera, which employed a scan mechanism that yielded one complete frame in 10 s; (2) a gamma-ray spectrometer mounted on a 1.8 m boom; (3) a radar altimeter; and (4) a seismometer to be rough-landed on the lunar surface. The seismometer (code-named "Tonto") was encased in the lunar capsule along with an amplifier, a 50 mW transmitter, voltage control, a turnstile antenna, and six silver-cadmium batteries capable of operating the lunar capsule transmitter for 30 days, all designed to land on the Moon at 130 to 160 km/h (80 to 100 mph). The radar altimeter would be used for reflectivity studies, but was also designed to initiate capsule separation and ignite the retrorocket.
Mission.
Preparation for Ranger 3 was complicated by developmental issues with the Agena B stage, which had failed to operate correctly on Rangers 1-2. Agena was primarily the domain of the Air Force, who intended to use it for military payloads, and NASA had originally assumed it would begin flying in late 1960 or early 1961 by which time any developmental issues with the stage could be weeded out. However, Agena B ended up taking longer to put into service than originally anticipated and its performance also turned out to be somewhat less than expected, which forced some of the planned experiments on the Block II Rangers to be cancelled. While the Thor-Agena B had begun flying in October 1960, the Atlas-Agena B did not make its maiden voyage until July 1961, meaning that Ranger 1 was only the second time this launch vehicle combination been flown. This delay was explained by the fact that Air Force programs such as Midas (satellite) were taking much longer to develop than Ranger. In addition, as 1961 ended, Agena Bs had malfunctioned no less than seven times (the two Ranger launches and five Thor-Agena launches).
Major General Osmond Ritland, Commander of the Air Force Space Systems Division in Inglewood, California, promised NASA that all problems with Agena would be corrected and because they also affected DoD programs, the issue was being taken "quite seriously". Among other changes made would be a thorough review of all Lockheed field operating equipment and procedures, in addition an effort would be made to ensure that checkout procedures on Air Force and NASA Agenas were identical and any differences in them eliminated.
The mission was designed to boost towards the Moon by an Atlas/Agena, undergo one mid-course correction, and impact the lunar surface. At the appropriate altitude, the capsule was to separate and the retrorockets ignite to cushion the landing. A malfunction in the booster guidance system resulted in excessive spacecraft speed. Reversed command signals caused the spacecraft to pitch in the wrong direction and the TM antenna to lose earth acquisition, and mid-course correction was not possible. Finally, a spurious signal during the terminal maneuver prevented transmission of useful TV pictures. Ranger 3 missed the Moon by approximately 36,800 km on 28 January and is now in a heliocentric orbit. Some useful engineering data were obtained from the flight.
In mid-December 1961, Atlas 121D and Agena 6003 arrived at Cape Canaveral and were erected on LC-12. On January 18, 1962, Ranger 3 was stacked atop the booster, but the following day attempted fueling of the Atlas went awry when a tear was found in the intermediate bulkhead separating the LOX and RP-1 tanks. This would mean that the launch vehicle would have to be taken down from the pad for repairs, delaying the launch an entire month. However, Air Force and Convair officials instead suggested the novel solution of doing the repairs right there on LC-12. The Atlas's sustainer engine was removed and lowered into the flame deflector pit and a wooden scaffolding installed so that technicians could go up into the RP-1 tank, remove the damaged intermediate bulkhead, and replace it. By January 26, repairs were completed.
This was the first U.S. attempt to achieve impact on the lunar surface. The Block II Ranger spacecraft carried a TV camera that used an optical telescope that would allow imaging down to about 24 kilometers above the lunar surface during the descent. The main bus also carried a 42.6-kilogram instrument capsule that would separate from the bus at 21.4 kilometers altitude and then independently impact on the Moon. Protected by a balsa-wood outer casing, the capsule was designed to bounce several times on the lunar surface before coming to rest. The primary onboard instrument was a seismometer.
Liftoff took place at 3:30 PM EST on January 26, a mere hour and 15 minutes before the launch window closed, after which Ranger 3 could not have been launched for another month.
Around 140 seconds after liftoff, the guidance officer reported that he had lost his link on the Atlas. The antenna on the booster used to receive guidance commands had ceased operating and the autopilot system reverted to its built-in backup program, but unfortunately this lacked the same precision as the ground guidance and the Atlas's staging and engine cutoff did not occur on schedule. The engines also over-accelerated and imparted excessive velocity into the Agena and probe, so that it entered a higher-than-planned parking orbit. Even worse, equipment at a Florida tracking station malfunctioned and picked up Ranger 3's orbital parameters five minutes late. Meanwhile, the Agena restarted and sent the probe out of Earth orbit, but another error in its guidance program resulted in a further erroneous trajectory. This ensured that the spacecraft reached the Moon 14 hours early and missed it by 36,793 kilometers (22,862 miles) on 28 January.
Although impact with the Moon was no longer possible, Ranger 3 could still be used for deep-space studies. Commands were issued to unfurl the camera boom and on the 28th, a fixed-up computer program was uploaded. But midway through this maneuver, the probe's signal strength began to weaken and the computer system completely failed. The TV camera transmitted images, but as the antenna was now pointed away from Earth, they were extremely weak and noisy. It was possible to see the reference crosses on the camera lens, illuminated by reflected sunlight from the probe's chassis, but the Moon was not visible. With the computer dead, Ranger 3 became completely unresponsive to any ground commands and the earth and sun sensors were rendered useless. The gyroscopes continued to maneuver the probe and ground controllers momentarily reacquired a lock on the antenna, but without stable attitude control, they could not hold it steady. As they were unaware of the computer failure, they continued sending commands to Ranger 3 in vain. Sporadic tracking of the probe continued until January 31 when the attitude control thrusters exhausted their propellant supply, at which point the mission was officially terminated.

</doc>
<doc id="82406" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82406" title="Ranger 4">
Ranger 4

Ranger 4 was a spacecraft of the Ranger program designed to transmit pictures of the lunar surface to Earth stations during a period of 10 minutes of flight prior to crashing upon the Moon, to rough-land a seismometer capsule on the Moon, to collect gamma-ray data in flight, to study radar reflectivity of the lunar surface, and to continue testing of the Ranger program for development of lunar and interplanetary spacecraft. An onboard computer failure caused failure of the deployment of the solar panels and navigation systems; as a result the spacecraft crashed on the far side of the Moon without returning any scientific data. It was the first U.S. spacecraft to reach another celestial body.
Spacecraft design.
Ranger 4 was a Block II Ranger spacecraft virtually identical to Ranger 3. The basic vehicle was high and consisted of a lunar capsule covered with a balsawood impact-limiter, in diameter, a mono-propellant mid-course motor, a 5080 lbf (22.6 kN) thrust retrorocket, and a gold- and chrome-plated hexagonal base 1.5 m in diameter. A large high-gain dish antenna was attached to the base. Two wing-like solar panels (5.2 m across) were attached to the base and deployed early in the flight. Power was generated by 8680 solar cells contained in the solar panels which charged an 11.5 kg 1 kWh capacity AgZn launching and backup battery. Spacecraft control was provided by a solid-state computer and sequencer and an Earth-controlled command system. Attitude control was provided by Sun and Earth sensors, gyroscopes, and pitch and roll jets. The telemetry system aboard the spacecraft consisted of two 960 MHz transmitters, one at 3 W power output and the other at 50 mW power output, the high-gain antenna, and an omnidirectional antenna. White paint, gold and chrome plating, and a silvered plastic sheet encasing the retrorocket furnished thermal control.
Because heat sterilization was suspected to have caused the malfunction of Ranger 3's computer, this procedure was dropped on Ranger 4. The seismometer capsule was also painted with a sawtooth pattern for better thermal protection.
The experimental apparatus included: (1) a vidicon television camera, which employed a scan mechanism that yielded one complete frame in 10 s; (2) a gamma-ray spectrometer mounted on a 1.8 m boom; (3) a radar altimeter; and (4) a seismometer to be rough-landed on the lunar surface. The seismometer was encased in the lunar capsule along with an amplifier, a 50-milliwatt transmitter, voltage control, a turnstile antenna, and 6 silver-cadmium batteries capable of operating the lunar capsule transmitter for 30 days, all designed to land on the Moon at 130 to 160 km/h (80 to 100 mph). The radar altimeter would be used for reflectivity studies, but was also designed to initiate capsule separation and ignite the retro-rocket.
Mission.
Atlas 133D and Agena 6004 arrived at Cape Canaveral in March and began preflight checkouts. Unlike with previous Ranger launches, no serious difficulties were encountered in readying the launch vehicle for flight and the probe also passed all systems tests with ease. On April 20, Ranger 4 was stacked atop the booster and liftoff took place at 3:50 PM on April 23. Launch proceeded perfectly this time and there were no anomalies with either the Atlas or the Agena, which performed its second burn to send Ranger 4 on a translunar trajectory. 
After separation from the Agena, it was apparent that something was seriously amiss when tracking stations picked up Ranger 4's radio transmitter, but there was no telemetry data being returned or any response when commands were sent to the computer. Without telemetry, it could not be confirmed that the probe's solar panels had unfolded, but the fluctuating radio transponder indicated that Ranger 4 was tumbling and that the solar panels and high-gain antenna were not deployed either.
The Atlas and Agena had both performed perfectly, in fact so well that Ranger 4 would not even need a midcourse correction burn to impact the Moon. However, this was all futile if the spacecraft was inoperative. Ground controllers sent commands to the probe to unfurl the solar panels and high-gain antenna and manually use the attitude control system to stop the rolling motion it was in, but none of them did anything. The Spacecraft Data Analysis Team at JPL concluded that the main timer in Ranger 4's computer had stopped, which disabled the telemetry system, preprogrammed events such as solar panel deployment, and also made the probe completely unresponsive to manual commands. Even though lunar impact would occur as planned, the mission was for all intents and purposes a failure. Making it a more bitter pill to swallow was the nearly-flawless launch vehicle performance. The booster problems that affected Rangers 1-3 had been resolved, only for the probe itself to completely fail, as unlike the previous missions, Ranger 4 did not return any useful data. Finding the cause of the timer malfunction could also be difficult since it had occurred during the coasting phase prior to trans-lunar injection when Ranger 4 was passing between tracking stations in the Caribbean and South Africa.
Without solar power, Ranger 4's batteries ran down on the morning of April 26 and the radio transponder ceased operating. The tiny transmitter in the seismometer capsule continued sending out a 50-milliwatt signal. Ranger 4 impacted the far side of the Moon (229.3 degrees E, 15.5 degrees S) at 9600 km/hr at 12:49:53 UT on April 26, 1962 after 64 hours of flight.
NASA officials tried to put a positive spin on the mission, noting that it was the first time an American spacecraft had reached the surface of the Moon and that the probe was "far more sophisticated" than the Soviet Luna 2 probe in 1959, which had been little more than a pressurized sphere designed to deposit pennants on the surface at impact. The excellent performance of the Atlas-Agena booster had also raised morale.
This spacecraft, similar in design to Ranger 3, was the first U.S. spacecraft to reach another celestial body. Although the spacecraft did not achieve its primary objective, the Atlas-Agena-Ranger combination performed without fault for the first time.

</doc>
<doc id="82409" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82409" title="Venera 2MV-1 No.1">
Venera 2MV-1 No.1

Venera 2MV-1 No.1, also known as Sputnik 19 in the West, was a Soviet spacecraft, which was launched in 1962 as part of the Venera programme, and was intended to become the first spacecraft to land on Venus. Due to a problem with its upper stage it failed to leave low Earth orbit, and reentered the atmosphere a few days later. It was the first of two Venera 2MV-1 spacecraft, both of which failed to leave Earth orbit.
Venera 2MV-1 No.1 was launched at 02:18:45 UTC on 25 August 1962, atop a Molniya 8K78 carrier rocket flying from Site 1/5 at the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The first three stages of the rocket operated nominally, injecting the fourth stage and payload into a low Earth orbit. The fourth stage then coasted until one hour and fifty seconds after launch, when it fired its ullage motors in preparation for ignition. One of the ullage motors failed to fire, and when the main engine ignited for a four-minute burn to place the spacecraft into heliocentric orbit, the stage began to tumble out of control. Forty-five seconds later, its engine cut off, leaving the spacecraft stranded in Earth orbit. It reentered the atmosphere on 28 August 1962, three days after it had been launched.
The designations Sputnik 23, and later Sputnik 19 was used by the United States Naval Space Command to identify the spacecraft in its Satellite Situation Summary documents, since the Soviet Union did not release the internal designations of its spacecraft at that time, and had not assigned it an official name due to its failure to depart geocentric orbit.

</doc>
<doc id="82411" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82411" title="Venera 2MV-1 No.2">
Venera 2MV-1 No.2

Venera 2MV-1 No.2, also known as Sputnik 20 in the West, was a Soviet spacecraft, which was launched in 1962 as part of the Venera programme, and was intended to become the first spacecraft to land on Venus. Due to a problem with its upper stage it failed to leave low Earth orbit, and reentered the atmosphere a few days later. It was the second of two Venera 2MV-1 spacecraft, both of which failed to leave Earth orbit. The previous mission, Venera 2MV-1 No.1, was launched several days earlier.
Venera 2MV-1 No.2 was launched at 02:12:30 UTC on 1 September 1962, atop a Molniya 8K78 carrier rocket flying from Site 1/5 at the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The lower stages of the rocket operated nominally, injecting the fourth stage and payload into a low Earth orbit. Following a coast phase, the upper stage was to have ignited around sixty-one minutes and thirty seconds after launch, in order to place the spacecraft into heliocentric orbit. The ignition command did not reach the engine however, and the fuel valves did not open, so the upper stage failed to ignite leaving the payload in geocentric orbit. It reentered the atmosphere on 6 September 1962, five days after it had been launched.
The designations Sputnik 24, and later Sputnik 20 were used by the United States Naval Space Command to identify the spacecraft in its Satellite Situation Summary documents, since the Soviet Union did not release the internal designations of its spacecraft at that time, and had not assigned it an official name due to its failure to depart Earth orbit.

</doc>
<doc id="82412" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82412" title="Mars 2MV-4 No.1">
Mars 2MV-4 No.1

Mars 2MV-4 No.1 also known as Sputnik 22 in the West, was a Soviet spacecraft, which was launched in 1962 as part of the Mars programme, and was intended to make a flyby of Mars, and transmit images of the planet back to Earth. Due to a problem with the rocket which launched it, it was destroyed in low Earth orbit. It was the first of two Mars 2MV-4 spacecraft to be launched, the other being the Mars 1 spacecraft which was launched eight days later.
Launch.
With the Cuban Missile Crisis unfolding, the Soviet military ordered the Mars probe's launch vehicle pulled from LC-1 so they could install a nuclear-tipped R-7 missile on it. However, the US and Soviet Union quickly reached a compromise and defused the potentially disastrous geopolitical situation, so the launch could proceed normally. Mars 2MV-4 No.1 spacecraft was launched at 17:55:04 UTC on 24 October 1962, atop a Molniya 8K78 carrier rocket flying from Site 1/5 at the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The lower stages of the rocket performed nominally, placing the payload and the Blok L upper stage into low Earth orbit. When the Blok L ignited following a coast phase, lubricant leaked out of the turbopump, which consequently seized up and disintegrated. This caused the main engine to explode, destroying the upper stage and spacecraft. Twenty two pieces of debris from the spacecraft and upper stage were catalogued, which decayed between 29 October 1962 and 26 February 1963.
Designations.
The designations Sputnik 29, and later Sputnik 22, were used by the United States Naval Space Command to identify the spacecraft in its Satellite Situation Summary documents, since the Soviet Union did not release the internal designations of its spacecraft at that time, and had not assigned it an official name due to its failure to depart geocentric orbit. A United States Ballistic Missile Early Warning System station in Alaska detected the debris from the launch, and initially identified it as incoming nuclear warheads, since the launch had occurred during the Cuban Missile Crisis.

</doc>
<doc id="82413" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82413" title="Boris Vian">
Boris Vian

Boris Vian (; 10 March 1920 – 23 June 1959) was a French polymath: writer, poet, musician, singer, translator, critic, actor, inventor and engineer. He is best remembered today for his novels. Those published under the pseudonym Vernon Sullivan were bizarre parodies of criminal fiction, highly controversial at the time of their release. Vian's other fiction, published under his real name, featured a highly individual writing style with numerous made-up words, subtle wordplay and surrealistic plots. "L'Écume des jours" (Froth on the Daydream) is the best known of these works, and one of the few translated into English.
Vian was also an important influence on the French jazz scene. He served as liaison for Hoagy Carmichael, Duke Ellington and Miles Davis in Paris, wrote for several French jazz-reviews ("Le Jazz Hot", "Paris Jazz") and published numerous articles dealing with jazz both in the United States and in France. His own music and songs enjoyed popularity during his lifetime, particularly the anti-war song "Le Déserteur" (The Deserter).
Biography.
Early life.
Vian was born in 1920 into an upper middle-class family in the wealthy Parisian suburb of Ville d'Avray (Hauts-de-Seine). His parents were Paul Vian, a young rentier, and Yvonne Ramenez, amateur pianist and harpist. From his father Vian inherited a distrust of the church and the military, as well as a love of the bohemian life. Vian was the second of four children: the others were Lélio (1918), Alain (1921–1995) and Ninon (1924). The family occupied the "Les Fauvettes" villa. The name "Boris" was chosen by Yvonne, an avid classical music lover, after seeing a performance of Mussorgsky's opera "Boris Godunov".
Vian suffered from ill health throughout his childhood and had to be educated at home until the age of five. From 1926 to 1932 he studied first at a small lycée, then at Lycée de Sèvres. After the Wall Street Crash of 1929 the family's financial situation worsened considerably and they moved to a small lodge near "Les Fauvettes" (from 1929 to 1932 the Vians rented the villa to Yehudi Menuhin's family). Shortly after Vian's 12th birthday he developed rheumatic fever and after a while he also contracted typhoid. 
This combination led to severe health problems and left Vian with a heart condition that would ultimately lead to an early death. Vian gave an eyeblink to this heart condition in "l'Ecume des Jours", his most popular novel, featuring Chloë, the main female character as dying from a waterlily growing in her lung. 
Formal education and teenage years.
From 1932 to 1937, Vian studied at Lycée Hoche in Versailles. In 1936, Vian and his two brothers started organizing what they called "surprise-parties" ("surprises-parties"). They partook of mescaline in the form of a Mexican cacti called peyote. These gatherings became the basis of his early novels: "Trouble dans les andains" (Turmoil in the Swaths) (1943) and particularly "Vercoquin et le plancton" (Vercoquin and the Plankton) (1943–44). It was also in 1936 that Vian got interested in jazz; the next year he started playing the trumpet and joined the Hot Club de France.
In 1937, Vian graduated from Lycée Hoche, passing baccalauréats in mathematics, philosophy, Latin, Greek and German. He subsequently enrolled at Lycée Condorcet, Paris, where he studied special mathematics until 1939. Vian became fully immersed in the French jazz scene: for example, in 1939 he helped organize Duke Ellington's second concert in France. When WWII started, Vian was not accepted into the army due to poor health. He entered École Centrale des Arts et Manufactures in Paris and subsequently moved to Angoulême when the school moved there because of the war.
In 1940, Vian met Michelle Léglise, who became his wife in 1941. She taught Vian English and introduced him to translations of American literature. Also in 1940 Vian met Jacques Loustalot, who became a recurring character in several early novels and short stories as "the colonel". Loustalot died accidentally in 1949 falling from a building he was trying to climb on in order to enter into a flat by the window, after a bet. In 1942 Vian and his brothers joined a jazz orchestra under the direction of Claude Abbadie, who became a minor character in Vian's "Vercoquin et le plancton". The same year Vian graduated from École Centrale with a diploma in metallurgy and also in 1942 his son Patrick was born.
Career.
After Vian's graduation, he and Michelle moved to Paris' 10th arrondissement and, on 24 August 1942 he became an engineer at the French Association for Standardisation (AFNOR). By this time he was an accomplished jazz trumpeter, and in 1943 he wrote his first novel, "Trouble dans les andains" (Turmoil in the Swaths). His literary career started in 1943 with his first publication, a poem, in the Hot Club de France bulletin. The poem was signed Bison Ravi ("A Delighted Bison"), an anagram of Vian's real name. The same year Vian's father died, murdered at home by burglars.
In 1944 Vian completed "Vercoquin et le plancton" (Vercoquin and the Plankton), a novel inspired partly by surprise-parties of his youth and partly by his job at the AFNOR (which is heavily satirized in the novel). Raymond Queneau and Jean Rostand helped Vian to publish this work at Éditions Gallimard in 1947, along with several works Vian completed in 1946. These included his first major novels, "L'Écume des jours" and "L'automne à Pékin" (Autumn in Peking). The former, a tragic love story in which real world objects respond to the characters' emotions, is now regarded as Vian's masterpiece, but at the time of its publication it failed to attract any considerable attention. "L'automne à Pékin", which also had a love story at its heart but was somewhat more complex, also failed to sell well.
Frustrated by the commercial failure of his works, Vian vowed he could write a best-seller and wrote the hard-boiled novel "I Spit on Your Graves" ("J'irai cracher sur vos tombes") in only 15 days. Vian wrote an introduction in which he claimed to be the translator of the American shooting star writer by the name Vernon Sullivan. Vian persuaded his friend Jean d'Halluin, a début publisher, to publish the novel in 1947. Eventually the hoax became known and the book became one of the best-selling titles of that year. Vian wrote three more Vernon Sullivan novels from 1947 to 1949.
The year 1946 marked a turning point in Vian's life: At one of the popular parties that he and Michelle hosted he made acquaintance of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Albert Camus, became a regular in their literary circles and started regularly publishing various materials in "Les Temps Modernes". Vian admired Jean-Paul Sartre in particular and gave him ( as "Jean-Sol Partre") a prominent role in " l'Ecume des Jours" ( litt. "The scum of the days") published in English under the title: "Froth on the Daydream". Ironically, Sartre and Michelle Vian commenced a relationship that would eventually destroy Vian's marriage.
Despite his literary work becoming more important, Vian never left the jazz scene. He became a regular contributor to various jazz-related magazines, and played trumpet at Le Tabou. As a result, his financial situation improved, and he abandoned the job at the AFNOR. Vian also formed his own choir, "La petite chorale de Saint-Germain-des-Pieds" .
Later years.
The year 1948 saw the birth of Vian's daughter, Carole. He continued his literary career by writing Vernon Sullivan novels, and also published poetry collections: "Barnum's Digest" (1948) and "Cantilènes en gelée" (Cantelinas in Jelly) (1949). Vian also started writing plays, the first of which, "L'Équarrissage pour tous" (Slaughter for Everyone), was staged the year it was written, 1950. The same year saw publication of Vian's third major novel, "L'Herbe rouge" (The Red Grass). This was a much darker story than its predecessors, centering on a man who built a giant machine that could help him psychoanalyse his soul. Like the other two books, it did not sell well; Vian's financial situation had been steadily worsening since late 1948, and he was forced to take up translation of English-language literature and articles to get by. Vian separated from his wife, and in 1950 he met Ursula Kübler (1928–2010), a Swiss dancer; the two started an affair, and in 1951 Vian divorced Michelle. Ursula and Boris married in 1954.
Vian's last novel, "L'Arrache-cœur" (The Heart-extractor), was published in 1953, yet again to poor sales and Vian effectively stopped writing fiction (the only other work that appeared after 1953 was a revised version of "L'automne à Pékin', "published 1956). He concentrated on a new field, song-writing and performing, and continued writing poetry. Vian's songs were successful; in 1954 he embarked on his first tour as singer-songwriter. By 1955, when he was working as art director for Philips, Vian was active in a wide variety of fields, from song-writing to opera. He also wrote screenplays and several more plays. His first album, "Chansons possibles et impossibles" (Possible and Impossible Songs), was also recorded in 1955. He also wrote the first French rock and roll songs with his friend Henri Salvador, who sang them under the nickname Henry Cording. He wrote "Java Pour Petula" (a song about an English girl arriving in France, written in Parisian argot) for Petula Clark's first concert performances in France."
In 1955, Vian decided to perform some of his songs on stage himself. He had been a little upset that French singer Marcel Mouloudji (1922-1994), who created "Le Deserteur" (The Deserter) on stage the year before, had not accepted the original lyrics because he thought that it would lead to the song being banned. Though Vian accepted a change to one verse, the song was banned from TVs and radios until 1967. The record of Vian's songs performed by himself was not successful in France until ten years after Vian's death.
Vian's life was endangered in 1956 by a pulmonary edema, but he survived and continued working with the same intensity as before. In 1957 Vian completed another play, "Les Bâtisseurs d'empire" (The Empire Builders) (only published and staged in 1959); in 1958 Vian worked on the opera "Fiesta" with Darius Milhaud, and a collection of essays, "En avant la zizique... Et par ici les gros sous" (On with the Muzak... And Bring in the Big Bucks), was published the same year.
Death.
On the morning of 23 June 1959, Vian was at the Cinema Marbeuf for the screening of the film version of "I will Spit on Your Graves". He had already fought with the producers over their interpretation of his work, and he publicly denounced the film, stating that he wished to have his name removed from the credits. A few minutes after the film began, he reportedly blurted out: "These guys are supposed to be American? My ass!" He then collapsed into his seat and died from sudden cardiac death "en route" to the hospital.
Legacy.
During his lifetime, only the novels published under the name of Vernon Sullivan were successful. Those published in his real name, which had a real literary value in his eyes, remained a commercial failure, despite the support of famous authors of this time.
But, almost immediately after his death, "L'Écume des jours", then "L'automne à Pékin", "L'Arrache-coeur", and "L'Herbe roug"e, started to get recognition in France. They finally made Boris Vian into a legend for the youth of the 1960s and 1970s.
Writing songs for artists of his time allowed Vian in 1954 to get out of the problems he had with the IRS by confessing, after the amnesty of 1947, he was the author of ""I shall spit on your graves"" (considered pornographic, which had incurred the wrath of justice in 1946, and was banned again in 1949, along with his play ""L'Équarrissage pour tous"" in 1950). However, when he decided to sing himself the songs which were rejected by the stars, he succeeded only in reaching a limited audience (among which Léo Ferré et Georges Brassens), the public remaining unconvinced by his talent for singing.
Nevertheless the May 1968 in France generation, even more than the previous ones, loved his songs too, especially because of their impertinence.
As a song writer, Vian is also the source of the vocation of Serge Gainsbourg, who used to attend his show at the cabaret "Les Trois Baudets", and wrote, thirty years after: "I took it on the chin [...], he sang terrific things [...], it is because I heard him that I decided to try something interesting".
As a critic, Boris Vian was the first to support Gainsbourg in "Le Canard Enchaîné", in 1957.
Over the years Vian's work have become classics, often celebrated, and given to study in schools. Vian is still today the emblematic figure of Saint Germain des Prés (as it refers to the postwar decade when this district was the Mecca of artistic and intellectual life of Paris) even more, probably, than Jean-Paul Sartre and Juliette Greco, while, contrary to legend, he did not create this movement.

</doc>
<doc id="82416" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82416" title="Ranger 5">
Ranger 5

Ranger 5 was a spacecraft of the Ranger program designed to transmit pictures of the lunar surface to Earth stations during a period of 10 minutes of flight prior to impacting on the Moon, to rough-land a seismometer capsule on the Moon, to collect gamma-ray data in flight, to study radar reflectivity of the lunar surface, and to continue testing of the Ranger program for development of lunar and interplanetary spacecraft. Due to an unknown malfunction, the spacecraft ran out of power and ceased operation. It passed within 725 km of the Moon.
Spacecraft design.
Ranger 5 was a Block II Ranger spacecraft similar to Ranger 3 and Ranger 4. The basic vehicle was 3.1 m high and consisted of a lunar capsule covered with a balsawood impact-limiter, 65 cm in diameter, a mono-propellant mid-course motor, a retrorocket with a thrust of 5080 lbf (23 kN), and a gold and chrome plated hexagonal base 1.5 m in diameter. A large high-gain dish antenna was attached to the base. Two wing-like solar panels (5.2 m across) were attached to the base and deployed early in the flight. Power was generated by 8680 solar cells contained in the solar panels which charged an 11.5 kg 1 kWh capacity AgZn launching and backup battery. Spacecraft control was provided by a solid-state digital computer and sequencer and an earth-controlled command system. Attitude control was provided by six Sun and one Earth sensor, gyroscopes, and pitch and roll cold nitrogen gas jets. The telemetry system aboard the spacecraft consisted of two 960 MHz transmitters, one at 3 W power output and the other at 50 mW power output, the high-gain antenna, and an omnidirectional antenna. White paint, gold and chrome plating, and a silvered plastic sheet encasing the retrorocket furnished thermal control.
The experimental apparatus included: (1) a vidicon television camera, which employed a scan mechanism that yielded one complete frame in 10 s; (2) a gamma-ray spectrometer in a 300 mm sphere mounted on a 1.8 m boom; (3) a radar altimeter; and (4) a seismometer to be rough-landed on the lunar surface. The seismometer was encased in the lunar capsule along with an amplifier, a 50 mW transmitter, voltage control, a turnstile antenna, and six silver-cadmium batteries capable of operating the lunar capsule transmitter for 30 days, all designed to land on the Moon at 130 to 160 km/h (80 to 100 mph). The instrument package floated in a layer of freon within the balsawood sphere. The radar altimeter would be used for reflectivity studies, but was also designed to initiate capsule separation and ignite the retro-rocket.
Mission.
Ranger 5 was scheduled for launch in June 1962, but NASA instead decided to fly the Mariner Venus probes (basically modified Block I Rangers) first which gave more time to work out problems with the spacecraft. After Mariner 1 ended its mission in the Atlantic Ocean instead of interplanetary space, the agency started coming under increased scrutiny from Congress due to its apparent inability to have any kind of success with planetary probes. Republican Congressman James Fulton confronted NASA Director of the Office of Programs J.J. Wyatt, noting that Mariner 1 had cost US taxpayers $14 million and that there was no excuse at this point to still have failures every launch. As July 1962 ended, there had been 12 planetary probe attempts going back to 1958 and only two (Pioneer 4 and Pioneer 5) accomplished all of their mission goals. It might have been small consolation that Soviet planetary probe efforts during this time were little more successful, however all of their failures were kept secret, in addition the totalitarian Soviet state did not have to answer to the public about the waste of their tax money on failed space missions.
The successful launch of Mariner 2 on August 22 momentarily blunted criticism of NASA and JPL and also seemed to verify the soundness of the Ranger design. Meanwhile, JPL engineers were still trying to figure out what had caused the computer failure on Ranger 4, which had occurred during a period when the probe was out of range of ground tracking. The malfunction was especially puzzling because the probe had been given very thorough ground testing without any anomalies occurring. Examination of telemetry records seemed to suggest that the failure had occurred during separation of Ranger 4 from the Agena, at the point where the electrical interface between the two was disconnected and Ranger 4 would have switched to internal power. The behavior of the probe indicated a transformer or inverter malfunction, probably a short circuit caused by loose metal coatings contacting the pins on the power umbilical attaching the probe to the Agena. Modifications to Ranger 5 included a backup timer to ensure continued operation of the telemetry system if the main computer failed, an additional nitrogen bottle to the attitude control system to reduce gas pressure, and an additional pyrotechnic igniter for the midcourse correction engine. Most importantly, extra diodes and fuses were added to the electrical lines to prevent another short from occurring.
Ranger 5 was heat-sterilized like Rangers 3-4 had been, so as to prevent unintended contamination of the Moon with Earth microbes. Rolf Halstrup, who was in charge of the sterilization program, had vocally objected to this procedure as he was convinced that subjecting the probes to a heat dosage was damaging the sensitive electronics in them. He convinced JPL management that sterilization of Ranger 4 had "very likely" damaged the main computer sequencer and timer and that the procedure needed to be stopped to ensure reliability of the spacecraft. Management agreed to stop sterilizing Ranger probes, but only on Ranger 8 and up, as Rangers 6-7 had already been sterilized.
On August 20, Ranger 5 began the long cross-country trip from California to Florida and arrived there the day of Mariner 2's launch. Atlas 215D and Agena 6005 arrived later that week and prelaunch checkouts were started. Initial preparations focused on the launch vehicle itself, which was causing almost as many problems as the Ranger probes themselves. The Atlas-Agena combination malfunctioned four out of the six times that NASA had launched it and every booster that was delivered to Cape Canaveral required modifications or repair work before it could fly. Moreover, in the year between Ranger 1 and Mariner 2, there had been no improvement whatsoever in the quality control of the Atlas-Agenas. Since Ranger launches had been delayed before by booster problems, technicians rushed to make sure nothing of the sort would delay Ranger 5's mission.
Tracking of Mariner 2 was an ongoing job during this time and since NASA's deep space tracking networks could not handle both probes at once, it was decided to switch attention to Ranger 5 for its short mission.
After two launch attempts were aborted, one due to an electrical short in the probe and the other due to weather concerns, the go to fly was given for October 18. Liftoff took place at 12:59 PM EST and the Atlas soon vanished into an overcast gray sky. For the third launch in a row, the booster's radio ground guidance malfunctioned when a rate beacon failed, but backup commands radioed from the ground kept it on course. The Agena reached orbit successfully and began the burn to place Ranger 5 on a translunar trajectory.
Elation turned to dismay once again when high temperatures were detected in the computer system; shortly afterwards, power generation from the solar panels ceased. The gamma ray detector was turned on, but the computer did not issue the command to align the spacecraft with Earth. Even worse, the telemetry receivers at the tracking stations in Australia and South Africa malfunctioned, returning garbled data. It was obvious that an electrical short had disabled the solar panels, which meant that Ranger 5 now had only a few hours before it would run out of battery power. JPL technicians held out hope that they could still partially salvage the mission by firing the midcourse correction engine to ensure impact with the Moon, but they had to do it quickly before power ran out. Ground controllers sent commands to unfurl the high-gain antenna and align the probe for the midcourse burn, but during this time more electrical shorts apparently occurred because there was a momentary dropout from the telemetry transmitter. The midcourse engine was fired, but Ranger 5 exhausted its batteries halfway through the burn. The radio transponder and telemetry signals ceased, followed by uncontrolled tumbling of the probe. Ranger 5 passed 450 miles from the lunar surface en route to a permanent orbit around the Sun. Signals were still received from the tiny seismometer capsule until fading as the probe's distance from Earth became too great.
Mission controllers tracked it to a distance of 1.3 million km (808,000) miles.
This was the third attempt to impact the lunar surface with a Block II Ranger spacecraft. On this mission, just 15 minutes after normal operation, a malfunction led to the transfer of power from solar to battery power. Normal operation never resumed; battery power was depleted after 8 hours, and all spacecraft systems died. The first midcourse correction was never implemented, and Ranger 5 passed the Moon at a range of 724 kilometers on 21 October and entered heliocentric orbit. It was tracked to a distance of 1,271,381 kilometers. Before loss of signal, the spacecraft sent back about 4 hours of data from the gamma-ray experiment.
Following the failure of this launch (missing the moon), the electronic assembly for the next versions were completely rebuilt by RCA Astro Electronics Division in East Windsor, New Jersey. The satellites rebuilt by RCA Astro worked up to expectations. All photos were returned and helped NASA determine good landing sites for the lunar landers.

</doc>
<doc id="82417" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82417" title="F. W. Murnau">
F. W. Murnau

Friedrich Wilhelm "F. W." Murnau (born Friedrich Wilhelm Plumpe; December 28, 1888March 11, 1931) was a German film director. Murnau was greatly influenced by Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Shakespeare and Ibsen plays he had seen at the age of 12, and became a friend of director Max Reinhardt. During World War I he served as a company commander at the eastern front and was in the German air force, surviving several crashes without any severe injuries.
Arguably Murnau's most-known work is his 1922 film "Nosferatu", an adaptation of Bram Stoker's "Dracula". Although not a commercial success due to copyright issues with Stoker's novel, the film was considered a masterpiece of Expressionist artwork. He was also known for his work with the 1924 film "The Last Laugh" and his interpretation of Goethe's Faust (1926). He later emigrated to Hollywood in 1926, where he joined the Fox Studio and made three films, including "" (1927), "4 Devils" (1928) and "City Girl" (1930).
In 1931 Murnau travelled to Bora Bora to make the film "Tabu" with documentary film pioneer Robert J. Flaherty, who left after artistic disputes with Murnau, who had to finish the movie on his own. A week prior to the opening of the film "Tabu", Murnau died in a Santa Barbara hospital from injuries he had received in an automobile accident that occurred along the Pacific Coast Highway near Rincon Beach, southeast of Santa Barbara.
Of the 21 films Murnau directed, 8 have been completely lost, leaving 13 surviving in their entirety. One reel of his feature "Marizza, genannt die Schmuggler-Madonna" survives.
Early years.
Murnau was born in Bielefeld, Province of Westphalia, and grew up in Kassel from the time he was seven. He had two brothers, Bernhard and Robert, and two stepsisters, Ida and Anna. Murnau's mother Otilie Volbracht was the second wife of his father Heinrich Plumpe, the owner of a cloth factory in the north-western part of Germany. Their villa was often turned into a stage for little plays, directed by Murnau, who already read books of Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Shakespeare and Ibsen plays at the age of 12. He took the name "Murnau" from the town of that name, which is near Lake Staffel, south of Munich. The director was said to have an icy, imperious disposition and an obsession with film.
Murnau studied philology at the University in Berlin and later art history and literature in Heidelberg, where director Max Reinhardt saw him at a students' performance and decided to invite him to his actor-school. He soon became a friend of Franz Marc (the Blue Rider artist based in Murnau), Else Lasker-Schüler and Hans Ehrenbaum-Degele. In World War I Murnau served as a company commander at the eastern front. Murnau joined the German air force in northern France two years later and survived eight crashes without severe injuries. He landed in Switzerland where he was interned and won a prize for the best production-concept.
Career.
After World War I ended, Murnau returned to Germany where he soon established his own film studio with actor Conrad Veidt. His first feature-length film, "The Boy in Blue", a drama inspired by the famous Thomas Gainsborough painting, was released in 1919. He explored the popular theme of dual personalities, much like Robert Louis Stevenson's "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde", in 1920's "Der Janus-Kopf" starring Veidt and Bela Lugosi.
Murnau's most famous film is "Nosferatu", a 1922 adaptation of Bram Stoker's "Dracula" for which Stoker's widow sued for copyright infringement. Murnau lost the lawsuit and all prints of the film were ordered to be destroyed, but bootleg prints survived. The vampire, played by German stage actor Max Schreck, resembled a rat which was known to carry the plague. The origins of the word are from Stoker's novel, where it is used by the Romanian townsfolk to refer to Count Dracula and presumably, other undead.
Nearly as important as "Nosferatu" in Murnau's filmography was "The Last Laugh" ("Der Letzte Mann", German "The Last Man") (1924), written by Carl Mayer (a very prominent figure of the "Kammerspielfilm" movement) and starring Emil Jannings. The film introduced the subjective point of view camera, where the camera "sees" from the eyes of a character and uses visual style to convey a character's psychological state. It also anticipated the cinéma vérité movement in its subject matter. The film also used the "unchained camera technique", a mix of tracking shots, pans, tilts, and dolly moves. Also, unlike the majority of Murnau's other works, "The Last Laugh" is considered a "Kammerspielfilm" with Expressionist elements. Unlike expressionist films, "Kammerspielfilme" are categorized by their chamber play influence, involving a lack of intricate set designs and story lines / themes regarding social injustice towards the working classes. Murnau was a homosexual.
Murnau's last German film was the big budget "Faust" (1926) with Gösta Ekman as the title character, Emil Jannings as Mephisto and Camilla Horn as Gretchen. Murnau's film draws on older traditions of the legendary tale of Faust as well as on Goethe's classic version. The film is well known for a sequence in which the giant, winged figure of Mephisto hovers over a town sowing the seeds of plague.
"Nosferatu" (music by Hans Erdmann) and "Faust" (music by Werner R. Heymann) were two of the first films to feature original film scores.
Hollywood.
Murnau emigrated to Hollywood in 1926, where he joined the Fox Studio and made "" (1927), a movie often cited by scholars as one of the greatest of all time. Released in the Fox Movietone sound-on-film system (music and sound effects only), "Sunrise" was not a financial success, but received several Oscars at the very first Academy Awards ceremony in 1929. In winning the Academy Award for Unique and Artistic Production it shared what is now the Best Picture award with the movie "Wings". In spite of this, Murnau was financially well off, and purchased a farm in Oregon.
Murnau's next two films, the (now lost) "4 Devils" (1928) and "City Girl" (1930), were modified to adapt to the new era of sound film and were not well received. Their poor receptions disillusioned Murnau, and he quit Fox to journey for a while in the South Pacific.
Together with documentary film pioneer Robert J. Flaherty, Murnau travelled to Bora Bora to make the film "Tabu" in 1931. Flaherty left after artistic disputes with Murnau who had to finish the movie on his own. The movie was censored in the United States for images of bare-breasted Polynesian women. The film was originally shot by cinematographer Floyd Crosby as half-talkie, half-silent, before being fully restored as a silent film — Murnau's preferred medium.
Death.
A week prior to the opening of the film "Tabu", Murnau drove up the coast from Los Angeles, California in a hired Rolls-Royce. The young driver, a 14-year-old Filipino servant, crashed the car against an electric pole. Murnau hit his head and died in a hospital the next day, in nearby Santa Barbara, before the premiere of his last film.
Murnau was entombed in Southwest Cemetery in Stahnsdorf (Südwest-Kirchhof Stahnsdorf) near Berlin. Only 11 people attended the funeral. Among them were Robert J. Flaherty, Emil Jannings, Greta Garbo and Fritz Lang, who delivered the eulogy. Garbo also commissioned a death mask of Murnau, which she kept on her desk during her years in Hollywood.
In July 2015 Murnau's grave was broken into, the remains disturbed and the skull removed by persons unknown. Wax residue was reportedly found at the site, leading some to speculate that candles had been lit, perhaps with an occult or ceremonial significance. As this disturbance was not an isolated incident, the cemetery managers are considering sealing the grave.
References in popular culture.
In 2000, director E. Elias Merhige released "Shadow of the Vampire", a fictionalization of the making of "Nosferatu". Murnau is portrayed by John Malkovich. In the film, Murnau is so dedicated to making the film genuine that he actually hires a real vampire (Willem Dafoe) to play Count Orlok.
In the fifth season of "American Horror Story", subtitled "", Murnau is a mentioned character who, sometime in the early 1920s, travels to the Carpathian Mountains while doing research for the film "Nosferatu". There, he discovers a community of vampires, and becomes one himself. After returning to the United States, Murnau turns actor Rudolph Valentino and Natacha Rambova into vampires to preserve their beauty. Valentino later transforms his fictional lover, Elizabeth Johnson, into a vampire, and she goes on to become The Countess, the central antagonist of the season.

</doc>
<doc id="82418" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82418" title="TRIPOS">
TRIPOS

TRIPOS ("TRIvial Portable Operating System") is a computer operating system. Development started in 1976 at the Computer Laboratory of Cambridge University and it was headed by Dr. Martin Richards. The first version appeared in January 1978 and it originally ran on a PDP-11. Later it was ported to the Computer Automation LSI4 and the Data General Nova. Work on a Motorola 68000 version started in 1981 at the University of Bath. MetaComCo acquired the rights to the 68000 version and continued development until TRIPOS was chosen by Commodore Amiga in March 1985 to form part of an operating system for their new computer; it was also used at Cambridge as part of the Cambridge Distributed Computing System.
Influences on the Amiga computer.
In July 1985, the Amiga was introduced, incorporating TRIPOS in the AmigaDOS module of AmigaOS. AmigaDOS included a command line interface and the Amiga File System. The entire AmigaDOS module was originally written in BCPL (an ancestor of the C programming language), the same language used to write TRIPOS.
Features.
TRIPOS provided features such as pre-emptive multi-tasking (using strict-priority scheduling), a hierarchical file system and multiple command line interpreters.
The most important TRIPOS concepts have been the non-memory-management approach (meaning no checks are performed to stop programs from using unallocated memory) and message passing by means of passing pointers instead of copying message contents. Those two concepts together allowed for sending and receiving over 1250 packets per second on a 10 MHz Motorola 68010 CPU.
Most of TRIPOS was implemented in BCPL. The kernel and device drivers were implemented in assembly language.
TRIPOS was ported to a number of machines, including the Data General Nova 2, the Computer Automation LSI4, Motorola 68000 and Intel 8086- based hardware. It included support for the Cambridge Ring local area network. More recently, Martin Richards produced a port of TRIPOS to run under Linux, using Cintcode BCPL virtual machine.
TRIPOS is still actively maintained by Open G I Ltd. (formerly Misys Financial Systems) in Worcestershire, UK. Many British insurance brokers have a Linux/Intel based TRIPOS system serving networked workstations over a TCP/IP connection - the systems are used to run Open G I's BROOMS Application suite. Open G I have added a number of features to support the modern office such as the ability to integrate into many mainstream applications and services such as SQL server, Citrix XENAPP, terminal servers, etc.
Cintpos.
Cintpos is an experimental interpretive version of TRIPOS which runs on the Cintcode BCPL virtual machine, also developed by Martin Richards.

</doc>
<doc id="82420" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82420" title="Sesame">
Sesame

Sesame (; "Sesamum indicum") is a flowering plant in the genus "Sesamum". Numerous wild relatives occur in Africa and a smaller number in India. It is widely naturalized in tropical regions around the world and is cultivated for its edible seeds, which grow in pods.
Sesame seed is one of the oldest oilseed crops known, domesticated well over 3000 years ago. Sesame has many species, most being wild and native to sub-Saharan Africa. "Sesame indicum," the cultivated type, originated in India. Sesame is highly tolerant to drought-like conditions and grows where other crops may fail.
Sesame has one of the highest oil contents of any seed. With a rich, nutty flavor, it is a common ingredient in cuisines across the world. Like other nuts and foods, it can trigger allergic reactions in some people.
The world harvested about 4.8 million metric tonnes of sesame seeds in 2013. The largest producer of sesame seeds in 2013 was Myanmar. The world's largest exporter of sesame seeds was India, and Japan was the largest importer.
It is an annual plant growing tall, with opposite leaves long with an entire margin; they are broad lanceolate, to broad, at the base of the plant, narrowing to just broad on the flowering stem.
The flowers are yellow, tubular, long, with a four-lobed mouth. The flowers may vary in colour, with some being white, blue, or purple.
Sesame fruit is a capsule, normally pubescent, rectangular in section, and typically grooved with a short, triangular beak. The length of the fruit capsule varies from 2 to 8 cm, its width varies between 0.5 and 2 cm, and the number of loculi varies from four to 12. The fruit naturally splits open (dehisces) to release the seeds by splitting along the septa from top to bottom or by means of two apical pores, depending on the varietal cultivar. The degree of dehiscence is of importance in breeding for mechanised harvesting, as is the insertion height of the first capsule.
Sesame seeds are small. Their size, form, and colours vary with the thousands of varieties now known. Typically, the seeds are about 3 to 4 mm long by 2 mm wide and 1 mm thick. The seeds are ovate, slightly flattened, and somewhat thinner at the eye of the seed (hilum) than at the opposite end. The weight of the seeds is between 20 and 40 mg. The seed coat (testa) may be smooth or ribbed.
Sesame seeds occur in many colours depending on the cultivar. The most traded variety of sesame is off-white coloured. Other common colours are buff, tan, gold, brown, reddish, gray, and black.
Sesame seed is sometimes sold with its seed coat removed (decorticated). This is the variety often present on top of buns in developed economies.
Etymology and languages.
The word "sesame" is from Latin "sesamum" or Greek "sésamon" - "seed or fruit of the sesame plant".
From the roots above, words with the generalized meaning “oil, liquid fat” are derived. Sesame names vary among numerous languages.
Origins.
Sesame seed is considered to be the oldest oilseed crop known to humanity. The genus has many species, and most are wild. Most wild species of the genus "Sesamum" are native to sub-Saharan Africa. "Sesame indicum," the cultivated type, originated in India.
Charred remains of sesame recovered from archeological excavations have been dated to 3500-3050 BC. Fuller claims trading of sesame between Mesopotamia and the Indian sub-continent occurred by 2000 BC. Some reports claim sesame was cultivated in Egypt during the Ptolemiac period, while others suggest the New Kingdom.
Records from Babylon and Assyria, dating about 4000 years ago, mention sesame. Egyptians called it "sesemt", and it is included in the list of medicinal drugs in the scrolls of the "Ebers Papyrus" dated to be over 3600 years old. Archeological reports from Turkey indicate that sesame was grown and pressed to extract oil at least 2750 years ago in the empire of Urartu.
The historic origin of sesame was favored by its ability to grow in areas that do not support the growth of other crops. It is also a robust crop that needs little farming support—it grows in drought conditions, in high heat, with residual moisture in soil after monsoons are gone or even when rains fail or when rains are excessive. It was a crop that could be grown by subsistence farmers at the edge of deserts, where no other crops grow. Sesame has been called a survivor crop.
Cultivation.
Sesame is very drought-tolerant, in part due to its extensive root system. However, it requires adequate moisture for germination and early growth. While the crop survives drought, as well as presence of excess water, the yields are significantly lower in either conditions. Moisture levels before planting and flowering impact yield most.
Most commercial cultivars of sesame are intolerant of water-logging. Rainfall late in the season prolongs growth and increases high harvest-shattering losses. Wind can also cause shattering at harvest.
Initiation of flowering is sensitive to photoperiod and to sesame variety. The photoperiod also impacts the oil content in sesame seed; increased photoperiod increases oil content. The oil content of the seed is inversely proportional to its protein content.
Sesame varieties have adapted to many soil types. The high-yielding crops thrive best on well-drained, fertile soils of medium texture and neutral pH. However, these have low tolerance for soils with high salt and water-logged conditions. Commercial sesame crops require 90 to 120 frost free days. Warm conditions above favor growth and yields. While sesame crops can grow in poor soils, the best yields come from properly fertilized farms.
Since sesame is a small, flat seed, it is difficult to dry it after harvest because the small seed makes movement of air around the seed difficult. Therefore, the seeds need to be harvested as dry as possible and stored at 6% moisture or less. If the seed is too moist, it can quickly heat up and become rancid.
Processing.
After harvesting, the seeds are usually cleaned and hulled. In some countries, once the seeds have been hulled, they are passed through an electronic colour-sorting machine that rejects any discolored seeds to ensure perfect colour. This is done because sesame seeds with consistent appearance are perceived to be of better quality by consumers, and sell for a higher price. Immature or off-sized seeds are removed and used for oil production.
Production and trade.
In 2013, the global harvest from an aggregate of 9.4 million hectares was about 4.8 million metric tonnes of sesame seeds, with Myanmar, India, and China as the top three producers accounting for 44% of global production (table). In total for 2013, Asia produced 2.46 million metric tons, the most of any continent.
The most productive sesame seed farms in the world in 2013 were in the European Union with an average composite yield of 6.3 metric tonnes per hectare (compared to the global average of 0.5); Italy reported the highest nationwide yield of 8.5 metric tonnes per hectare. A large yield gap and farm loss differences exist between major sesame seed producers, in part because of knowledge gap, poor crop management practices, and use of technologies.
The white and other lighter-coloured sesame seeds are common in Europe, the Americas, West Asia, and the Indian subcontinent. The black and darker-coloured sesame seeds are mostly produced in China and southeast Asia. Africa produces a variety of sesame seeds.
Beginning in the 1950s, U.S. production of the crop has been largely centered in Texas, with acreage fluctuating between 10,000 and 20,000 acres (40 to 80 km2) in recent years. The country's crop does not make up a significant global source; imports have now outstripped domestic production.
Trade.
The world traded over a billion dollars worth of sesame seeds in 2010. The trade volume has been increasing rapidly in the last two decades.
Japan is the world's largest sesame importer. Sesame oil, particularly from roasted seed, is an important component of Japanese cooking and traditionally the principal use of the seed. China is the second-largest importer of sesame, mostly oil-grade. China exports lower-priced food-grade sesame seeds, particularly to southeast Asia. Other major importers are the United States, Canada, the Netherlands, Turkey, and France.
Sesame seed is a high-value cash crop. Prices have ranged between US$800 and 1700 per metric ton between 2008 and 2010.
Sesame exports sell across a wide price range. Quality perception, particularly how the seed looks, is a major pricing factor. Most importers who supply ingredient distributors and oil processors only want to purchase scientifically treated, properly cleaned, washed, dried, colour-sorted, size-graded, and impurity-free seeds with a guaranteed minimum oil content (not less than 40%) packed according to international standards. Seeds that do not meet these quality standards are considered unfit for export and are consumed locally. In 2008, by volume, premium prices, and quality, the largest exporter was India, followed by Ethiopia and Myanmar.
Nutritional information.
For a 100-gram serving, sesame seeds (whether roasted or just dried) are rich in calories (565 kcal), providing an excellent source of essential nutrients as part of the Daily Value (DV, tables). While containing high amounts of protein, dietary fiber, and total fat (mainly as linoleic acid and oleic acid), sesame seeds are also particularly rich (> 20% DV) in B vitamins and the dietary minerals manganese, magnesium, calcium, iron, and zinc (table).
The flour that remains after oil extraction from sesame seeds is 35-50% protein and contains carbohydrates. This flour, also called sesame meal, is an excellent high-protein feed for poultry and livestock.
Chemical composition.
Sesame seeds contain the lignans, sesamolin, sesamin, pinoresinol and lariciresinol.
Cuisine.
Sesame seed is a common ingredient in various cuisines. It is used whole in cooking for its rich, nutty flavour. Sesame seeds are sometimes added to breads, including bagels and the tops of hamburger buns. Sesame seeds may be baked into crackers, often in the form of sticks. In Sicily and France, the seeds are eaten on bread ("ficelle sésame", sesame thread). In Greece, the seeds are also used in cakes.
Fast-food restaurants use buns with tops sprinkled with sesame seeds. About 75% of Mexico's sesame crop is purchased by McDonald's
for use in their sesame seed buns worldwide.
In Asia, sesame seeds are sprinkled onto some sushi-style foods. In Japan, whole seeds are found in many salads and baked snacks, and tan and black sesame seed varieties are roasted and used to make the flavouring "gomashio". East Asian cuisines, like Chinese cuisine, use sesame seeds and oil in some dishes, such as "dim sum", sesame seed balls ( or 煎堆; Cantonese: "jin deui"), and the Vietnamese "bánh rán". Sesame flavour (through oil and roasted or raw seeds) is also very popular in Korean cuisine, used to marinate meat and vegetables. Chefs in tempura restaurants blend sesame and cottonseed oil for deep-frying.
Sesame, or "simsim" as it is known in East Africa, is used in African cuisine. In Togo, the seeds are a main soup ingredient and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the north of Angola, "wangila" is a delicious dish of ground sesame, often served with smoked fish or lobster.
Sesame seeds and oil are used extensively in India. In most parts of the country, sesame seeds mixed with heated jaggery, sugar, or palm sugar is made into balls and bars similar to peanut brittle or nut clusters and eaten as snacks. In Manipur, black sesame is used in the preparation of "thoiding" and in "singju" (a kind of salad). Thoiding is prepared with ginger and chili and vegetables are used in the spicy "singu" dish. In Assam, black sesame seeds are used to make "til pitha" and "tilor laru" (sesame seed balls) during "bihu". In Punjab and Tamil Nadu, a sweet ball called "pinni" (پنی) in Urdu and "ell urundai" in Tamil, "ellunda" (എള്ളുണ്ട) in Malayalam, "yellunde" (sesame ball, usually in jaggery) in Kannada and "tilgul" in Marathi, is made of its seeds mixed with sugar. It is eaten in various forms during the festival of Makar Sankranti.
Also in Tamil Nadu, sesame oil used extensively in their cuisine, "milagai podi", a ground powder made of sesame and dry chili is used to enhance flavor, and is consumed along with other traditional foods such as "idli". In Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, sesame oil is used as a preservative, as well as to temper the heat of their spicy foods, pickles, and condiments.
Sesame seed cookies and wafers, both sweet and savory, are popular in places such as Charleston, South Carolina. Sesame seeds, also called "benne", are believed to have been brought into 17th-century colonial America by West African slaves. Since then, they have become part of various American cuisines.
In Caribbean cuisine, sugar and white sesame seeds are combined into a bar resembling peanut brittle and sold in stores and street corners.
Sesame is a popular and essential ingredient in many Middle Eastern cuisines. Sesame seeds are made into a paste called "tahini" (used in various ways, including "hummus bi tahini") and the Middle Eastern confection "halvah". Ground and processed, the seed is also used in sweet confections.
In South Asia, Middle East, and East Asian cuisines, popular confectionery are made from sesame mixed with honey or syrup and roasted into a sesame candy. In Japanese cuisine "goma-dofu" (胡麻豆腐) is made from sesame paste ("tahini") and starch.
Mexican cuisine refers to sesame seeds as "ajonjolí". It is mainly used as a sauce additive, such as "mole" or "adobo". It is often also used to sprinkle over artisan breads and baked in traditional form to coat the smooth dough, especially on whole-wheat flatbreads or artisan nutrition bars, such as "alegrías".
In Sicilian cuisine, what are commonly called "Italian sesame seed cookies" are known as "giuggiuleni" LAY-nee) -->. A "giuggiulena" usually refers to a cookie, while a "giurgiulena" usually refers to a nougat-like candy, often made as a Christmas food. Both are alternative spellings for "sesame seed" in the Sicilian language.
Sesame oil is sometimes used as a cooking oil in different parts of the world, though different forms have different characteristics for high-temperature frying. The "toasted" form of the oil (as distinguished from the "cold-pressed" form) has a distinctive pleasant aroma and taste, and is used as table condiment in some regions, especially in East Asia. Toasted sesame oil is also added to flavor soups and other hot dishes, usually just before serving, to avoid dissipating the volatile scents too rapidly.
Although sesame leaves are edible as a leaf vegetable, recipes for Korean cuisine calling for "sesame leaves" are often a mistranslation, and really mean perilla.
Allergy.
Sesame seeds and sesame oil are a serious allergen to some people, including infants. In Australia, the occurrence of allergy to sesame seed was estimated to be 0.42% among all children, while in the United Kingdom, the allergic reaction was found to affect 0.04% of adults. The occurrence of allergy to sesame in patients with some form of food allergy was found to be much higher than in the general population, ranging from 0.5% in Switzerland to 8.5% in Australia. In other words, allergy to sesame affects a small percentage of overall human population, but sesame allergy is high in people who already show symptoms of allergy to other foods.
The symptoms of sesame seed allergy can be classified into:
Amounts as low as 100 mg of sesame seeds or flour and 3 ml of oil can trigger allergic reactions in severe cases of sesame allergic individuals. Most patients, however, show allergic reactions after consuming 2–10 g of sesame seeds or flour. The onset of the symptoms may occur within a few minutes up to 90 minutes after ingestion of a sesame seed product. Most patients had other allergic diseases such as asthma, hay fever, and eczema, and most patients also had a relative with an allergic disease. More than two-thirds of the patients with sesame allergy also had allergic reactions to other foods.
Prevalence of sesame allergy varies per country. While it is one of the three most common allergens in Israel, sesame allergy prevalence is considered small relative to other allergens in the United States. Some experts consider sesame allergies to have "increased more than any other type of food allergy over the past 10 to 20 years" in the United States. Such increasing prevalence led Canada to issue regulations that require food labels to note the presence of sesame.
In addition to products derived from sesame such as "tahini" and sesame oil, persons with sesame allergies are warned to stay away from a broad assortment of processed foods, including baked goods, tempeh, and generic "vegetable oil". In addition to possible food sources, individuals allergic to sesame have been warned that a variety of nonfood sources may also trigger a reaction to sesame, including adhesive bandages, cosmetics, hair-care products, perfumes, soaps and sunscreens, drugs, some fungicides and insecticides, lubricants, ointments and topical oils, and pet food.
At least one study found that "standard skin and blood testing for food allergies not predict whether a child has true sesame allergy." In which case, a food challenge under the direction of a physician may be required to properly diagnose a sesame allergy.
A cross-reactivity apparently exists between sesame allergens and peanut, rye, kiwifruit, poppy seed, and various tree nuts (such as hazelnut, black walnut, cashew, macadamia, and pistachio).
Literature.
In myths, the opening of the capsule releases the treasure of sesame seeds, as applied in the story of "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves" when the phrase "Open Sesame" magically opens a sealed cave. Upon ripening, sesame seeds split, releasing a pop and possibly indicating the origin of this phrase.
Sesame seeds are used conceptually in Urdu literature, in the proverbs ""til dharnay ki jagah na hona"", meaning a place so crowded that there is no room for a single seed of sesame, and ""in tilon mein teil nahee"", referring to a person who appears to be useful, but is not (selfish) when the time for need comes, literally meaning "there is no oil (left) in this sesame."

</doc>
<doc id="82423" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82423" title="Nosferatu">
Nosferatu

The film, shot in 1921 and released in 1922, was an unauthorized adaptation of Bram Stoker's "Dracula", with names and other details changed because the studio could not obtain the rights to the novel (for instance, "vampire" became "Nosferatu" and "Count Dracula" became "Count Orlok"). Stoker's heirs sued over the adaptation, and a court ruling ordered that all copies of the film be destroyed. However, a few prints of "Nosferatu" survived, and the film came to be regarded as an influential masterpiece of cinema. As of 2015, it is Rotten Tomatoes' second best-reviewed horror film of all time. The film was later released in the United States, where it instantly became a hit success, on June 3, 1929.
Plot.
Thomas Hutter lives in the (fictitious) German city of Wisborg. His employer, Knock, sends Hutter to Transylvania to visit a new client named Count Orlok. Hutter entrusts his loving wife Ellen to his good friend Harding and Harding's sister Annie, before embarking on his long journey. Nearing his destination in the Carpathian mountains, Hutter stops at an inn for dinner. The locals become frightened by the mere mention of Orlok's name and discourage him from traveling to his castle at night, warning of a werewolf on the prowl. The next morning, Hutter takes a coach to a high mountain pass, but the coachmen decline to take him any further than the bridge as nightfall is approaching. A black-swathed coach appears after Hutter crosses the bridge and the coachman gestures for him to climb aboard. Hutter is welcomed at a castle by Count Orlok. When Hutter is eating dinner and accidentally cuts his thumb, Orlok tries to suck the blood out, but his repulsed guest pulls his hand away.
Hutter wakes up to a deserted castle the morning after and notices fresh punctures on his neck, which he attributes to mosquitoes in his letter to his wife which he hands over to a courier on horseback to be delivered to his devoted wife. That night, Orlok signs the documents to purchase the house across from Hutter's own home and notices a photo of the Hutter's wife remarking that she has a lovely neck. Reading a book about vampires that he took from the local inn, Hutter starts to suspect that Orlok is Nosferatu, the "Bird of Death." He cowers in his room as midnight approaches, but there is no way to bar the door. The door opens by itself and Orlok enters, his true nature finally revealed, and Hutter hides under the bedcovers and falls unconscious. At the same time this is happening, the wife awakens from her sleep and in a trance walks towards the balcony and onto the railing. Alarmed, Harding shouts Ellen's name and she faints while he asks for a doctor. After the doctor arrives, she shouts Hutter's name remaining in the trance and apparently able to see Orlok in his castle threatening her unconscious husband. The doctor believes this trance-like state is due to "blood congestion". The next day, Hutter explores the castle. In its crypt, he finds the coffin in which Orlok is resting dormant. Hutter becomes horrified and dashes back to his room. Hours later from the window, he sees Orlok piling up coffins on a coach and climbing into the last one before the coach departs. Hutter escapes the castle through the window, but is knocked unconscious by the fall and awakes in a hospital.
When he is sufficiently recovered, he hurries home. Meanwhile, the coffins are shipped down river on a raft. They are transferred to a schooner, but not before one is opened by the crew, revealing a multitude of rats. The sailors on the ship get sick one by one; soon all but the captain and first mate are dead. Suspecting the truth, the first mate goes below to destroy the coffins. However, Orlok awakens and the horrified sailor jumps into the sea. Unaware of his danger, the captain becomes Orlok's latest victim when he ties himself to the wheel. When the ship arrives in Wisborg, Orlok leaves unobserved, carrying one of his coffins, and moves into the house he purchased. The next morning, when the ship is inspected, the captain is found dead. After examining the logbook, the doctors assume they are dealing with the plague. The town is stricken with panic, and people are warned to stay inside.
There are many deaths in the town, which are blamed on the plague. Knock, who had been committed to a psychiatric ward, escapes after murdering the warden. The townspeople give chase, but he eludes them by climbing a roof, then using a scarecrow. Meanwhile, Orlok stares from his window at the sleeping Ellen. Against her husband's wishes, Ellen had read the book he found. The book claims that the way to defeat a vampire is for a woman who is pure in heart to distract the vampire with her beauty all through the night. She opens her window to invite him in, but faints. When Hutter revives her, she sends him to fetch Professor Bulwer. After he leaves, Orlok comes in. He becomes so engrossed drinking her blood that he forgets about the coming day. When a rooster crows, Orlok vanishes in a puff of smoke as he tries to flee. Ellen lives just long enough to be embraced by her grief-stricken husband. The last scene shows Count Orlok's ruined castle in the Carpathian Mountains, symbolizing the end of Count Orlok's reign of terror.
Production.
The studio behind "Nosferatu", Prana Film, was a short-lived silent-era German film studio founded in 1921 by Enrico Dieckmann and occultist and artist Albin Grau, named for the Buddhist concept of prana. Its intent was to produce occult and supernatural themed films. "Nosferatu" was the only production of Prana Film as it declared bankruptcy in order to dodge copyright infringement suits from Bram Stoker's widow Florence Balcombe.
Grau had the idea to shoot a vampire film; the inspiration arose from Grau's war experience: in the winter of 1916, a Serbian farmer told him that his father was a vampire and one of the Undead.
Diekmann and Grau gave Henrik Galeen, a disciple of Hanns Heinz Ewers the task to write a screenplay inspired from Bram Stoker's 1897 novel "Dracula", despite Prana Film not having obtained the film rights. Galeen was an experienced specialist in dark romanticism; he had already worked on "Der Student von Prag" ("The Student of Prague") in 1913, and the screenplay for "Der Golem, wie er in die Welt kam" (') (1920). Galeen set the story in a fictional north German harbour town named Wisborg and changed the character names. He added the idea of the vampire bringing the plague to Wisborg via rats on the ship. He left out the Van Helsing vampire hunter character. Galeen's Expressionist style screenplay was poetically rhythmic, without being so dismembered as other books influenced by literary Expressionism, such as those by Carl Mayer. Lotte Eisner described Galeen's screenplay as "'" ("full of poetry, full of rhythm").
Filming began in July 1921, with exterior shots in Wismar. A take from Marienkirche's tower over Wismar marketplace with the Wasserkunst Wismar served as the establishing shot for the Wisborg scene. Other locations were the Wassertor, the Heiligen-Geist-Kirche yard and the harbour. In Lübeck, the abandoned Salzspeicher served as Nosferatu's new Wisborg house, the one of the churchyard from Aegidienkirche served as Hutters and down the Depenau "coffin bearers" bore coffins. Many walks of Lübeck took place in the hunt of "Knock", who ordered Hutter in the "Yard of Füchting" to meet the earl. Further exterior shots followed in Lauenburg, Rostock and on Sylt. The exteriors of the film set in Transylvania were actually shot on location in northern Slovakia, including the High Tatras, Vrátna Valley, Orava Castle, the Váh River, and Starhrad. The team filmed interior shots at the JOFA studio in Berlin's Johannisthal locality and further exteriors in the Tegel Forest.
For cost reasons, cameraman Fritz Arno Wagner only had one camera available, and therefore there was only one original negative. The director followed Galeen's screenplay carefully, following handwritten instructions on camera positioning, lighting, and related matters. Nevertheless, Murnau completely rewrote 12 pages of the script, as Galeen's text was missing from the director's working script. This concerned the last scene of the film, in which Ellen sacrifices herself and the vampire dies in the first rays of the Sun. Murnau prepared carefully; there were sketches that were to correspond exactly to each filmed scene, and he used a metronome to control the pace of the acting.
Music.
The original score was composed by Hans Erdmann to be performed by an orchestra during the projection. However, most of the score has been lost, and what remains is only a reconstitution of the score as it was played in 1922. This is why so many composers and musicians have written or improvised their own soundtrack to accompany the film. For example, James Bernard, composer of the soundtracks of many Hammer horror films in the late 1950s and 1960s, has written a score for a reissue.
Deviations from the novel.
The story of "Nosferatu" is similar to that of "Dracula" and retains the core characters—Jonathan and Mina Harker, the Count, etc.—but omits many of the secondary players, such as Arthur and Quincey, and changes all of the characters' names (although in some recent releases of this film, which is now in the public domain in the United States but not in most European countries, the written dialogue screens have been changed to use the "Dracula" versions of the names). The setting has been transferred from Britain in the 1890s to Germany in 1838.
In contrast to Dracula, Orlok does not create other vampires, but kills his victims, causing the townfolk to blame the plague, which ravages the city. Also, Orlok must sleep by day, as sunlight would kill him, while the original Dracula is only weakened by sunlight. The ending is also substantially different from that of "Dracula". The count is ultimately destroyed at sunrise when the "Mina" character sacrifices herself to him. The town called "Wisborg" in the film is in fact a mix of Wismar and Lübeck.
Release.
Shortly before the premiere, an advertisement campaign was placed in issue 21 of the magazine ', with a summary, scene and work photographs, production reports, and essays, including a treatment on vampirism by Albin Grau. "Nosferatus preview premiered on 4 March 1922 in the "Marmorsaal" of the Berlin Zoological Garden. This was planned as a large society evening entitled "" (Festival of Nosferatu), and guests were asked to arrive dressed in Biedermeier costume. The cinema premiere itself took place on 15 March 1922 at Berlin's .
Reception and legacy.
"Nosferatu" brought the director Murnau reinforced into the public eye, especially since his film "Der brennende Acker" ("The Burning Soil") was released a few days later. The press reported extensively on "Nosferatu" and its premiere. With the laudatory votes, there was also occasional criticism that the technical perfection and clarity of the images did not fit the horror theme. The Filmkurier of 6 March 1922 said that the vampire appeared too corporeal and brightly lit to appear genuinely scary. Hans Wollenberg described the film in photo-Stage No. 11 of 11 March 1922 as a "sensation" and praised Murnau's nature shots as "mood-creating elements." In the Vossische Zeitung of 7 March 1922, "Nosferatu" was praised for its visual style.
This was the only Prana Film; the company declared bankruptcy after Stoker's estate, acting for his widow, Florence Stoker, sued for copyright infringement and won. The court ordered all existing prints of "Nosferatu" burned, but one purported copy of the film had already been distributed around the world. These prints were duplicated over the years, kept alive by a cult following, making it an example of an early cult film.
The movie has received overwhelmingly positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes it has a "Certified Fresh" label and holds a 97% "fresh" rating based on 60 reviews. It was ranked twenty-first in "Empire" magazine's "The 100 Best Films of World Cinema" in 2010. In 1997, critic Roger Ebert added "Nosferatu" to his list of The Great Movies, writing:
In popular culture.
The 1977 song "Nosferatu" from the album "Spectres" by American rock band Blue Öyster Cult is directly about the film.
In 1979, Werner Herzog's tribute film "Nosferatu the Vampyre" starred Klaus Kinski (as Count Dracula, not Orlok).
In 1989, French progressive rock outfit Art Zoyd released "Nosferatu" on Mantra Records. Thierry Zaboitzeff and Gérard Hourbette composed the pieces, to correspond with a truncated version of the film then heavily in circulation in the public domain.
Influential post-rock band Slint's 1991 album "Spiderland" featured a song titled "Nosferatu Man," whose lyrics reference the macabre and gothic horror.
In 1991, White Wolf publishing created the tabletop role-playing game "" which featured several Vampire factions. One of these is the Nosferatu, whose members resemble Count Orlok. The Nosferatu clan has since been included in subsequent reprinting, reboots, and video game adaptations of the RPG.
In the 1994 movie, "Interview With The Vampire", Brad Pitt's character Louis de Pointe du Lac, goes to a cinema presumably in 1922 (the year of Nosferatu's release), and watches Nosferatu (almost in parody of the vampire culture he has become part of, and Count Orlok's death scene is shown.
In 1995, Bernard J. Taylor adapted the story into the musical "Nosferatu the Vampire" starring Peter Karrie as "Nosferatu", Claire Moore as "Mina", Barry James as "Renfield", Mario Frangoulis as "Jonathan", Mark Wynter as "Van Helsing" and Simon Burke as "The Innkeeper".
The 2000 film "Shadow of the Vampire", directed by E. Elias Merhige and written by Steven A. Katz, is a fictionalized account of the making of "Nosferatu". It stars John Malkovich and Willem Dafoe.
In 2000 Count Orlok appeared in a brief cameo in children's animated television series "SpongeBob SquarePants". The episode, "Graveyard Shift", was written by Jay Lender, who pushed for a random gag that featured Orlok.
An opera version composed by Alva Henderson in 2004, with libretto by Dana Gioia, was released on CD in 2005, with Douglas Nagel as "Count Orlok/Nosferatu", Susan Gundunas as "Ellen Cutter" (Ellen Hutter/Lucy Harker), Robert McPherson as "Eric Cutter" (Thomas Hutter/Jonathan Harker) and Dennis Rupp as "Skuller" (Knock/Renfield).
In 2009 Louis Pecsi wrote and illustrated the graphic novel "Nosferatu: The Untold Origin", which gives an origin story to Count Orlok.
In 2010 the Mallarme Chamber Players of Durham, North Carolina, commissioned composer Eric J. Schwartz to compose an experimental chamber music score for live performance alongside screenings of the film, which has since been performed a number of times.
In 2012 scenes from the film were used in the exhibition "Dark Romanticism" at the Städel in Frankfurt as an example to illustrate the way in which ideas developed in 18th- and 19th-century art influenced story telling and aesthetics in 20th-century cinema.
On 28 October 2012, as part of the BBC Radio "Gothic Imagination" series, the film was reimagined on BBC Radio 3 as the radio play "Midnight Cry of the Deathbird" by Amanda Dalton directed by Susan Roberts, with Malcolm Raeburn playing the role of "Graf Orlok (Count Dracula)", Sophie Woolley as "Ellen Hutter", Henry Devas as "Thomas Hutter" and Terence Mann as "Knock".
In 2013, Spanish band Caspervek Trio wrote a new soundtrack for live screenings, premiered in Vigo in January 2014, with further performances in Sopron (Hungary) and Madrid.
Remake.
On 29 July 2015 it was reported that a remake of the film would be written and directed by "The Witch" director Robert Eggers and produced by Jay Van Hoy and Lars Knudsen.

</doc>
<doc id="82424" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82424" title="Gnomon">
Gnomon

A gnomon ([ˈnoʊmɒn], from Greek , "gnōmōn", literally: "one that knows or examines") is the part of a sundial that casts a shadow. 
The term has come to be used for a variety of purposes in mathematics and other fields.
History.
Anaximander (610–546 BC) is credited with introducing this Babylonian instrument to the Greeks. Oenopides used the phrase "drawn gnomon-wise" to describe a line drawn perpendicular to another. Later, the term was used for an L-shaped instrument like a steel square used to draw right angles. This shape may explain its use to describe a shape formed by cutting a smaller square from a larger one. Euclid extended the term to the plane figure formed by removing a similar parallelogram from a corner of a larger parallelogram. Indeed, the gnomon is the increment between two successive figurate numbers, including square and triangular numbers.
Hero of Alexandria defined a gnomon as that which, when added to an entity (number or shape), makes a new entity similar to the starting entity. In this sense Theon of Smyrna used it to describe a number which added to a polygonal number produces the next one of the same type. The most common use in this sense is an odd integer especially when seen as a figurate number between square numbers.
The Chinese used the gnomon. It is mentioned in the 2nd century "Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art" as being used much earlier by the Duke of Zhou (11th century BC).
Orientation.
In the northern hemisphere, the shadow-casting edge of a sundial gnomon is normally oriented so that it points north and is parallel to the rotation axis of the Earth. That is, it is inclined to the horizontal at an angle that equals the latitude of the sundial's location. At present, such a gnomon should thus point almost precisely at Polaris, as this is within a degree of the North celestial pole. 
On some sundials, the gnomon is vertical. These were usually used in former times for observing the altitude of the Sun, especially when on the meridian. The style is the part of the gnomon that casts the shadow. This can change as the sun moves. For example, the upper west edge of the gnomon might be the style in the morning and the upper east edge might be the style in the afternoon.
A three-dimensional gnomon is commonly used in CAD and computer graphics as an aid to positioning objects in the virtual world. By convention, the X axis direction is colored red, the Y axis green and the Z axis blue.
NASA astronauts used a gnomon as a photographic tool to indicate local vertical and to display a color chart when they were working on the Moon's surface.
In popular culture.
In the book "The Tower at the End of the World" by Brad Strickland, a giant tower and thin stairs turn out to be the gnomon of a giant sundial. The island the tower is found on is often called "Gnomon Island".
The Gnomon of Saint-Sulpice inside the church of Saint Sulpice in Paris, France, built to assist in determining the date of Easter, was fictionalized as a "Rose Line" in the novel "The Da Vinci Code".
A gnomon is used metaphorically in Charles Portis's novel "Masters of Atlantis".

</doc>
<doc id="82425" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82425" title="Sandwich">
Sandwich

A sandwich is a food item consisting of one or more types of food, such as vegetables, sliced cheese or meat, placed on or between slices of bread, or more generally any dish wherein two or more pieces of bread serve as a container or wrapper for some other food. The sandwich was originally a portable food item or finger food which began to be popular in the Western World. Today sandwiches in various versions are found worldwide.
Sandwiches are a popular type of lunch food, taken to work, school, or picnics to be eaten as part of a packed lunch. The bread can be used plain, or it can be coated with one or more condiments such as mayonnaise or mustard to enhance the flavours and texture. As well as being homemade, sandwiches are also widely sold in restaurants and cafes, and are sometimes served hot as well as cold. There are both savoury sandwiches, such as deli meat sandwiches, and sweet sandwiches, such as a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
The sandwich is considered to be the namesake of John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich, because of the claim that he was the eponymous inventor of this food combination. "The Wall Street Journal" has described it as Britain's "biggest contribution to gastronomy".
History.
The modern concept of a sandwich using slices of bread (as found within the Western World) can arguably be traced to 18th century Europe. However, the use of some kind of bread or bread-like substance to lie under (or under "and" over) some other food, or used to scoop up and enclose or wrap some other type of food, long predates the 18th century, and is found in numerous much older cultures worldwide.
The ancient Jewish sage Hillel the Elder is said to have wrapped meat from the Paschal lamb and bitter herbs between two pieces of old-fashioned soft matzah—flat, unleavened bread—during Passover in the manner of a modern wrap made with flatbread. Flat breads of only slightly varying kinds have long been used to scoop or wrap small amounts of food en route from platter to mouth throughout Western Asia and northern Africa. From Morocco to Ethiopia to India, bread is baked in flat rounds, contrasting with the European loaf tradition.
During the Middle Ages in Europe, thick slabs of coarse and usually stale bread, called "trenchers", were used as plates. After a meal, the food-soaked trencher was fed to a dog or to beggars at the tables of the wealthy, and eaten by diners in more modest circumstances. The immediate culinary precursor with a direct connection to the English sandwich was to be found in the Netherlands of the 17th century, where the naturalist John Ray observed that in the taverns beef hung from the rafters "which they cut into thin slices and eat with bread and butter laying the slices upon the butter"— explanatory specifications that reveal the Dutch "belegde broodje", open-faced sandwich, was as yet unfamiliar in England.
Initially perceived as food that men shared while gaming and drinking at night, the sandwich slowly began appearing in polite society as a late-night meal among the aristocracy. The sandwich's popularity in Spain and England increased dramatically during the 19th century, when the rise of industrial society and the working classes made fast, portable, and inexpensive meals essential.
It was at the same time that the European-stye sandwich finally began to appear outside of Europe. In the United States, the sandwich was first promoted as an elaborate meal at supper. By the early 20th century, as bread became a staple of the American diet, the sandwich became the same kind of popular, quick meal as was already widespread in the Mediterranean.
Etymology.
The first written usage of the English word appeared in Edward Gibbon's journal, in longhand, referring to "bits of cold meat" as a "Sandwich". It was named after John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich, an 18th-century English aristocrat. It is said that he ordered his valet to bring him meat tucked between two pieces of bread, and others began to order ""the same as Sandwich!"" It is commonly said that Lord Sandwich was fond of this form of food because it allowed him to continue playing cards, particularly cribbage, while eating, without using a fork, and without getting his cards greasy from eating meat with his bare hands.
The rumour in its familiar form appeared in Pierre-Jean Grosley's "Londres" (Neichatel, 1770), translated as "A Tour to London" 1772; Grosley's impressions had been formed during a year in London in 1765. The sober alternative is provided by Sandwich's biographer, N. A. M. Rodger, who suggests Sandwich's commitments to the navy, and to politics and the arts, mean the first sandwich was more likely to have been consumed at his desk.
Before being known as sandwiches, this food combination seems to simply have been known as "bread and meat" or "bread and cheese".
Usage.
In the United States, a court in Boston, Massachusetts ruled that "sandwich" includes at least two slices of bread. and "under this definition, this court finds that the term 'sandwich' is not commonly understood to include burritos, tacos, and quesadillas, which are typically made with a single tortilla and stuffed with a choice filling of meat, rice, and beans." The issue stemmed from the question of whether a restaurant that sold burritos could move into a shopping centre where another restaurant had a no-compete clause in its lease prohibiting other "sandwich" shops.
In Spain, where the word sandwich is borrowed from the English language, it refers to a food item made with English sandwich bread. It is otherwise known as a "bocadillo".
In the United Kingdom and Australia, the term "sandwich" is more narrowly defined than in the US: it refers only to an item which uses sliced bread from a loaf. An item with similar fillings, but using an entire bread roll cut horizontally in half, is always referred to as a "roll". (In South Australia, there is a regional variant of the "roll", superficially similar to a club sandwich, where the bread roll is sliced three times (parallel cuts), and filling is put in the first and third openings, but not the second. This makes the resulting "double cut roll" easier to handle: the top half and the bottom half are eaten separately.) Any hot item based on a bread roll is referred to as a "burger", never as a "sandwich". However, hot sliced (not ground) beef between two slices of toasted bread is referred to as a "steak sandwich" - it is the sliced loaf bread that distinguishes the steak sandwich from a "burger".
The verb to sandwich has the meaning "to position anything between two other things of a different character, or to place different elements alternately", and the noun sandwich has related meanings derived from this more general definition. For example, an ice cream sandwich consists of a layer of ice cream between two layers of cake or biscuit. Similarly, Oreos and Custard Creams are described as sandwich biscuits because they consist of a soft filling between layers of biscuit.
The word "butty" (a reference to the fact that butter is often used in British sandwiches) is common in some northern parts of England as a slang synonym for "sandwich", particularly to refer to certain kinds of sandwiches including the chip butty, bacon butty, or sausage butty, though some people make the distinction that a butty is made using a single buttered slice, folded over rather than cut. "Sarnie" is a similar colloquialism, as is the Australian English colloquialism "sanger". Likewise, the words "sanger" and "piece" are used for sandwich in Scottish dialect; regarding the latter, an example of the use of "piece" is "piece and ham", meaning "piece of bread and ham".
Varieties.
Among the many varieties of sandwich popular in the United States are the BLT, cheese sandwich, Club sandwich, Dagwood, French dip, hamburger, Monte Cristo, Muffuletta, pastrami on rye, peanut butter and jelly sandwich, cheesesteak, pilgrim, Po' boy, Reuben, sloppy joe, and submarine.

</doc>
<doc id="82427" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82427" title="Corriere della Sera">
Corriere della Sera

The Corriere della Sera (; English: "Evening Courier") is an Italian daily newspaper published in Milan with an average daily circulation of 410,242 copies in December 2015.
First published on 5 March 1876, "Corriere della Sera" is one of Italy's oldest newspapers. It reached a circulation of over 1 million under editor and co-owner Luigi Albertini, 1900-1925. He was a strong opponent of Socialism, of clericalism, and of Prime Minister Giovanni Giolitti who was willing to compromise with those forces. Albertini's opposition to the Fascist regime forced the other co-owners to oust him 1925.
Today its main competitors are Rome's "la Repubblica" and Turin's "La Stampa".
History and profile.
"Corriere della Sera" was first published on Sunday 5 March 1876 by Eugenio Torelli Viollier. In 1899 the paper began to offer a weekly illustrated supplement, "Domenica del Corriere".
In the 1910s and 1920s, under the direction of Luigi Albertini, "Corriere della Sera" became the most widely read newspaper in Italy, maintaining its importance and influence into the present century. It was "Corriere della Sera" which introduced comics in Italy in 1908 through a supplement for children, namely "Corriere dei piccoli".
The newspaper's headquarters has been in the same buildings since the beginning of the 20th century, and therefore it is popularly known as "the Via Solferino newspaper" after the street where it is still located. As the name indicates, it was originally an evening paper.
Mario Borsa, a militant anti-fascist, was appointed the editor-in-chief of "Corriere della Sera" in May 1945. He was fired because of his political leanings in August 1946 and was replaced by Guglielmo Emanuel, a right-wing journalist, in the post. Emanuel served in the post until 1952.
During the fascist regime in Italy "Corriere della Sera" funded the Mussolini Prize which was awarded to the writers Ada Negri and Emilio Cecchi among the others.
"Corriere della Sera" was the organ of the conservative establishment in Italy and was strongly anti-communist and pro-NATO in the 1950s. The paper was the mouthpiece of the north Italian industrial bourgeoisie and also, was functional in shaping the views of the Italian upper and middle classes during this period.
The owner of the "Corriere della Sera" was the Crespi family. In the 1960s the RCS Media acquired a share in "Corriere della Sera", listed in the Italian stock exchange. Its main shareholders are Mediobanca, the Fiat group and some of the biggest industrial and financial groups in Italy. In 1974 the RCS Media became the majority owner of the paper.
Alberto Cavallari was the editor-in-chief of the paper during the early 1980s. In 1981 the newspaper was laterally involved in the P2 scandal when it was discovered that the secret Freemason lodge had the newspaper's editor Franco Di Bella and the former owner Angelo Rizzoli on its member lists. In September 1987 the paper launched a weekly magazine supplement, "Sette", which is the first in its category in Italy. From 1987 to 1992 the editor-in-chief of "Corriere della Sera" was Ugo Stille.
The 1988 circulation of "Corriere della Sera" was 715,000 copies, making it the second most read newspaper in Italy. The paper started its Saturday supplement, "IO Donna", in 1996. In 1997 "Corriere della Sera" was the best-selling Italian newspaper with a circulation of 687,000 copies.
"Corriere della Sera" had a circulation of 715,000 copies in 2001. In 2002 it fell to 681,000 copies. In 2003, its then editor Ferruccio de Bortoli resigned from the post. The journalists and opposition politicians claimed the resignation was due to the paper's criticism of Silvio Berlusconi.
In 2004, "Corriere della Sera" launched an online English section focusing on Italian current affairs and culture. The same year it was the best-selling newspaper in Italy with a circulation of 677,542 copies. Its circulation in December 2007 was 662,253 copies.
It is one of the most visited Italian-language news websites, attracting over 1.6 million readers every day. The online version of the paper was the thirteenth most visited website in the country.
On 24 September 2014 "Corriere della Sera" changed its broadsheet format to the Berliner format.
Content and sections.
The "Third Page" (a one page-survey dedicated to culture) used to feature a main article named "Elzeviro" (name from the font used at begin for that), which over the years has been signed by all the editors as well as major novelists, poets and journalists. "Corriere Scienza" is the science section of the paper.
Contributors (past and present).
The Italian novelist Dino Buzzati was a journalist at the "Corriere della Sera". Other notable contributors include Eugenio Montale, Gabriele D'Annunzio, Italo Calvino, Alberto Moravia, Amos Oz, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Giovanni Spadolini, Oriana Fallaci, Alessandra Farkas, Lando Ferretti, Brunella Gasperini, Enzo Biagi, Indro Montanelli, Paolo Brera, Tracy Chevalier, Sergio Romano and Paolo Mieli. 
Editors
Columnist & Journalists

</doc>
<doc id="82429" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82429" title="Dino Buzzati">
Dino Buzzati

Dino Buzzati-Traverso (; 14 October 1906 – 28 January 1972) was an Italian novelist, short story writer, painter and poet, as well as a journalist for "Corriere della Sera". His worldwide fame is mostly due to his novel "The Tartar Steppe", but he is also known for his well received collections of short stories.
Life.
Buzzati was born at San Pellegrino, Belluno, in his family's ancestral villa. Buzzati's mother, a veterinarian by profession, was Venetian and his father, a professor of international law, was from an old Bellunese family. Buzzati was the second of his parents' four children. One of his brothers was the well-known Italian geneticist Adriano Buzzati-Traverso. In 1924, he enrolled in the law faculty of the University of Milan, where his father once taught. As he was completing his studies in law, he was hired, at the age of 22, by the Milanese newspaper "Corriere della Sera", where he would remain until his death. He began in the corrections department, and later worked as a reporter, special correspondent, essayist, editor and art critic. It is often said that his journalistic background informs his writing, lending even the most fantastic tales an aura of realism.
Buzzati himself comments on the connection (as cited by Lawrence Venuti):
During World War II, Buzzati served in Africa, as a journalist attached to the Regia Marina. After the end of the war, "Il deserto dei Tartari" was published Italy-wide and quickly brought critical recognition and fame to the author. He married Almerina Antoniazzi in 1966, which also marked release of his last novel, "Un amore". In 1972, Buzzati died of cancer after a protracted illness.
Works summary.
Buzzati began writing fiction in 1933. His works of fiction include five novels, theatre and radio plays, librettos, numerous books of short stories and poetry. His librettos include four for operas by Luciano Chailly, as well as that of the opera "La giacca dannata" by Giulio Viozzi.
He wrote a children's book "La famosa invasione degli orsi in Sicilia" (translated by Frances Lobb into English as "The Bears' Famous Invasion of Sicily"). Lemony Snicket wrote an introduction and reader's companion to a 2005 English edition.
Also an acclaimed and exhibited artist, Buzzati also combined his artistic and writerly exploits into making a comic book based on the myth of Orpheus, "Poem Strip".
"The Tartar Steppe", his most famous novel, tells the story of a military outpost that awaits a Tartar invasion. In its sentiment and its conclusions, it has been compared to existentialist works, notably Albert Camus's "The Myth of Sisyphus".
His writing is sometimes cited as magical realism, social alienation, and the fate of the environment and of fantasy in the face of unbridled technological progress are recurring themes. He has also written a variety of short stories featuring fantastic animals such as the bogeyman and, his own invention, the colomber ("il colombre").
His best works are highly regarded in France but little known in English.

</doc>
