<doc id="73440" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73440" title="Duck Soup (1933 film)">
Duck Soup (1933 film)

Duck Soup is a 1933 Marx Brothers anarchic comedy film written by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby, with additional dialogue by Arthur Sheekman and Nat Perrin, and directed by Leo McCarey. First released theatrically by Paramount Pictures on November 17, 1933, it starred what were then billed as the "Four Marx Brothers" (Groucho, Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo) and also featured Margaret Dumont, Raquel Torres, Louis Calhern and Edgar Kennedy. It was the last Marx Brothers film to feature Zeppo, and the last of five Marx Brothers movies released by Paramount.
Compared to the Marx Brothers' previous Paramount films, "Duck Soup" was a box-office disappointment, although it was not a "flop" as is sometimes reported. The film opened to mixed reviews, although this by itself did not end the group's business with Paramount. Bitter contract disputes, including a threatened walk-out by the Marxes, crippled relationships between them and Paramount just as "Duck Soup" went into production. After the film fulfilled their five-picture contract with the studio, the Marxes and Paramount agreed to part ways.
While contemporaneous critics of "Duck Soup" felt it did not quite meet the standards of its predecessors, critical opinion has evolved and the film has since achieved the status of a classic. "Duck Soup" is now widely considered among critics to be a masterpiece of comedy, and the Marx Brothers' finest film.
In 1990 the United States Library of Congress deemed "Duck Soup" "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.
Plot.
The wealthy Mrs. Teasdale (Margaret Dumont) insists that Rufus T. Firefly (Groucho) be appointed leader of the small, bankrupt country of Freedonia before she will continue to provide much-needed financial aid. Meanwhile, neighboring Sylvania is attempting to annex the country. Sylvanian ambassador Trentino (Louis Calhern) tries to foment a revolution and to woo Mrs. Teasdale, and he tries to dig up dirt on Firefly by sending in spies Chicolini (Chico) and Pinky (Harpo).
After failing to collect useful information against Firefly, Chicolini and Pinky are able to infiltrate the government when Chicolini is appointed Secretary of War after Firefly sees him selling peanuts outside his window. Meanwhile, Firefly's secretary, Bob Roland (Zeppo) suspects Trentino's motives, and advises Firefly to get rid of Trentino by insulting him. Firefly agrees to the plan, but after a series of personal insults exchanged between Firefly and Trentino, the plan backfires when Firefly slaps Trentino instead of being slapped by him. As a result, the two countries come to the brink of war. Adding to the international friction is the fact that Firefly is also courting Mrs. Teasdale, and, like Trentino, hoping to get his hands on her late husband's wealth.
Trentino learns that Freedonia's war plans are in Mrs. Teasdale's safe and orders Chicolini and Pinky to steal them. Chicolini is caught by Firefly and put on trial, during which war is officially declared, and everyone is overcome by war frenzy, breaking into song and dance. The trial put aside, Chicolini and Pinky join Firefly and Bob Roland in anarchic battle, resulting in general mayhem.
The end of the film finds Trentino caught in makeshift stocks, with the Brothers pelting him with fruit. Trentino surrenders, but Firefly tells him to wait until they run out of fruit. Mrs. Teasdale begins singing the Freedonia national anthem in her operatic voice and the Brothers begin hurling fruit at "her" instead.
Mirror scene.
In the "mirror scene," Pinky, dressed as Firefly, pretends to be Firefly's reflection in a missing mirror, matching his every move—including absurd ones that begin out of sight—to near perfection. In one particularly surreal moment, the two men swap positions, and thus the idea of which is a reflection of the other. Eventually, and to their misfortune, Chicolini, also disguised as Firefly, enters the frame and collides with both of them.
Although its appearance in "Duck Soup" is the best known instance, the concept of the mirror scene did not originate in this film. Max Linder included it in "Seven Years Bad Luck" (1921), where a man's servants have accidentally broken a mirror and attempt to hide the fact by imitating his actions in the mirror's frame. Charlie Chaplin used a similar joke in "The Floorwalker" (1916), though it did not involve a mirror.
This scene has been recreated many times; for instance, in the Bugs Bunny cartoon "Hare Tonic", the Mickey Mouse cartoon "Lonesome Ghosts", in the Abbott and Costello film "Lost in a Harem" (1944), in The Three Stooges short "Idle Roomers" (1944), in "The Pink Panther" (1963), in the TV series "Gilligan's Island" ("Gilligan vs. Gilligan", 1966), in the film "Big Business" (1988), in "The X-Files" episode "Dreamland", and is parodied in the "Family Guy" episode "Road to Germany". Harpo himself did a reprise of this scene, dressed in his usual costume, with Lucille Ball also donning the fright wig and trench coat, in the "I Love Lucy" episode "Lucy and Harpo Marx".
Other scenes and jokes.
The climactic production number ridicules war by comparing nationalism to a minstrel show. One line is a variant on the old Negro spiritual "All God's Chillun Got Wings" (and was reportedly considered for deletion for the film's current DVD release, for fear of offending African Americans):
<poem>They got guns,
We got guns,
All God's chillun got guns!
I'm gonna walk all over the battlefield,
'Cause all God's chillun got guns!</poem>
A portion of the final production sequence is used near the end of the Woody Allen film "Hannah and Her Sisters" to give Allen's character a motivation to carry on with life.
Shortly after, during the final battle scenes, "rightfully [...] called the funniest of all of cinema", Firefly can be seen wearing a different costume in almost every sequence until the end of the film, including American Civil War outfits (first Union and then Confederacy), a British palace guard uniform, a Boy Scout Scoutmaster's uniform, and even a coon-skin Davy Crockett cap. Meanwhile, the exterior view of the building they are occupying changes appearance from a bunker to an old fort, etc. Firefly assures his generals that he has "a man out combing the countryside for volunteers." Sure enough, Pinky is wandering out on the front lines wearing a sandwich board sign reading, "Join the Army and see the Navy." Later, Chicolini volunteers Pinky to carry a message through enemy lines; Firefly tells him, "[...] and remember, while you're out there risking life and limb through shot and shell, we'll be in here thinking what a sucker "you" are." Thomas Doherty has described this line as "sum up the Great War cynicism towards all things patriotic".
The melodramatic exclamation "This means war!" certainly did not originate with "Duck Soup", but it is used several times in the film—at least twice by Trentino and once by Firefly—and would be repeated by Groucho in "A Night at the Opera" and "A Day at the Races". Variations of this phrase would later become a frequently-used catch-phrase for Daffy Duck and Bugs Bunny in Warner Bros. cartoons.
In another scene, the film pokes fun at the Hays Code. Due to the Code, a man and woman could not be shown in bed together. The camera begins the scene in a woman's bedroom, panning across the foot of the bed. A pair of women's shoes are shown on the floor, then a pair of man's shoes and then four horseshoes. The camera cuts to a shot of the entire room: Pinky is sleeping in one bed with the horse, and the woman is in bed next to them.
The film's writers recycled a joke used in "Horse Feathers" in this dialogue with Chico:
Prosecutor: Chicolini, isn't it true you sold Freedonia's secret war code and plans?Chicolini: Sure! I sold a code and two pairs o' plans!
The street vendor confrontations are also well-remembered pieces of physical comedy: Chico and Harpo harass a lemonade seller (comedy film veteran Edgar Kennedy), egged on by his irritation that they have stolen his pitch.
First, there is a scene involving the knocking off, dropping, picking up and exchanging of hats. Later, Kennedy (a much larger man) steals bags of Harpo's peanuts, and Harpo responds by burning Kennedy's new straw boater hat; in return, Kennedy pushes over their peanut wagon. Harpo responds by stepping knee-deep into Kennedy's lemonade tank, where he imitates a stereotypical Italian grape-crushing peasant; this drives off Kennedy's waiting line of customers.
Just before the Mirror Scene is the Radio Scene. Harpo tries the combination to the safe on a box which proves to be a radio, and it starts blaring the break-up strain of John Philip Sousa's "Stars and Stripes Forever". The music continues despite frantic
efforts to silence, and finally destroy, the radio.
Harpo often doffed his hat on-screen, but Chico very rarely removed his Tyrolean hat, even when indoors. For a few seconds on-screen in the earlier scene, Chico's head is uncovered, revealing a wavy wig. Chico had already started going bald when the brothers appeared in their first Broadway production, "I'll Say She Is", in 1924. All of the Brothers' natural receding-hairline patterns were similar, but Harpo and Chico covered theirs with wigs (Groucho would later sport an obvious toupee in the films "At The Circus" and "Go West").
Cast.
Cast notes.
Comparing the original scripts with the finished film, most of the characters' initial scripted names were later changed. Only the names of Chicolini and Mrs. Teasdale were kept. Groucho's character—originally named "Rufus T. "Firestone""—eventually became Rufus T. Firefly, while the name of Harpo's character—named Pinky in the final product—was given in the pressbook as "Brownie". "Ambassador Frankenstein of Amnesia" was quickly changed to Ambassador Trentino of Sylvania. Zeppo's character remained Firefly's son until very late in production, finally becoming Bob Roland, his secretary; also, Mrs Teasdale's niece "June Parker" transformed into Vera Marcal, first introduced as Trentino's "niece" before ultimately becoming his companion.
Production.
The Marx Brothers' previous film, "Horse Feathers", had been Paramount's highest-grossing film of 1932. Encouraged by this success, the studio suggested on August 2, 1932, that they rush out a follow-up. Already at this early stage, the story (provisionally entitled "Oo La La") was set in a mythical kingdom. On August 11, 1932, "The Los Angeles Times" reported that production would commence in five weeks with the famed Ernst Lubitsch directing.
This was a turbulent time in the Marx Brothers' career. Near bankruptcy and reorganization at Paramount Pictures brought fears that money due the Brothers would never be paid; as a result, the Brothers threatened to leave Paramount and start their own company, "Marx Bros., Inc". Their first planned independent production was a film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning Broadway musical "Of Thee I Sing", with Norman McLeod leaving Paramount to direct. During late 1932 and early 1933, Groucho and Chico were also working on "Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel", a radio show written by Nat Perrin and Arthur Sheekman; there was even, at one time, talk of casting the two as their radio characters for the new film (an idea that would eventually be used for the later Marx Brothers film "The Big Store").
By October 4, 1932, Arthur Sheekman, Harry Ruby, and Bert Kalmar began writing the screenplay for the next Paramount film, which was now called "Firecrackers". Herman Mankiewicz was to supervise production, beginning in January 1933. By December 1932, "Firecrackers" had become "Cracked Ice". Grover Jones was also reported to have contributed to the first draft by Ruby and Kalmar. In "The Marx Brothers Encyclopedia", Glenn Mitchell says that "the first script's content is difficult to determine".
On January 18, 1933, Harry Ruby, Bert Kalmar and Grover Jones submitted to Paramount their "Second Temporary Script" for "Cracked Ice", and Paramount announced that shooting would commence on February 15. This script shows that the basic story of what would become "Duck Soup" had been fixed. In February, Paramount announced that the title had been changed to "Grasshoppers" ("because animal stories are so popular"), and that filming was set back to February 20.
However, on May 11, 1933, the Marx Brothers' father Sam "Frenchie" Marx died in Los Angeles of a heart attack, and shortly afterwards, the contract dispute with Paramount was settled. "The New York Post" reported on May 17 that the Brothers would make a new comedy for Paramount, called "Duck Soup". Leo McCarey was set for direction of the film. Three days later "The New York Sun" reported that "Duck Soup" would start filming in June. "Duck Soup"'s script was completed by July 11. The script was a continuation of Ruby and Kalmar's "Firecrackers"/"Cracked Ice" drafts, but contained more elements. Many of the film's clever gags and routines were lifted from "Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel", giving Perrin and Sheekman an "additional dialogue" credit.
Director McCarey reportedly came up with the title for the film, having previously used it for an earlier directorial effort with Laurel and Hardy. This continued the "animal" titles of the Brothers' previous three films, "Animal Crackers", "Monkey Business" and "Horse Feathers".
"Duck soup" was American English slang at that time; it meant something easy to do. Conversely, "to duck something" meant to avoid it. When Groucho was asked for an explanation of the title, he quipped, "Take two turkeys, one goose, four cabbages, but no duck, and mix them together. After one taste, you'll duck soup for the rest of your life."
McCarey also thought up "the very Laurel & Hardy-like sequence in which Harpo and Chico stage a break-in at Mrs Teasdale's house." Another McCarey contribution was the "mirror scene" a revival of an old vaudeville act, (see above).
Soundtrack.
Breaking with their usual pattern, neither Harpo's harp nor Chico's piano is used in the film, although Harpo briefly pretends to play harp on the strings of a piano, strumming chords in accompaniment to a music box that is playing the unlikely chime tune, "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" from rival studio Disney's "Three Little Pigs", released the same year as "Duck Soup".
The musical introduction to Groucho's character is similar to the ones in "Animal Crackers" and "Horse Feathers" but it did not become closely associated with him as did "Hooray for Captain Spaulding" from "Animal Crackers".
Zeppo, as usual, plays, according to James Agee, "a peerlessly cheesy improvement on the traditional straight man", in his final on-screen appearance with his Brothers. He sings with the group (including soloing the first few lines of the first song, "When the Clock on the Wall Strikes 10"). He also sings with the others in "Freedonia's Going to War", filling out the four-cornered symmetry as the Brothers sing and dance in pairs during the number.
Original songs by Kalmar and Ruby.
The "Freedonia National Anthem" is used frequently throughout the film, both as vocal and instrumental; the entire song seems to consist of "Hail, Hail, Freedonia, land of the brave and free", contrasting with the final line of "The Star-Spangled Banner". The "Sylvania theme", which sounds vaguely like "Rule, Britannia!", is also used several times. "When The Clock On The Wall Strikes 10", the first musical number in the film, is part of the same scene as "Just Wait 'Til I Get Through With It", Groucho's song about the laws of his administration. "This Country's Going To War" is the final musical ensemble in the film, and is also the only musical number in the Marx Brothers' films to feature all four of the Brothers.
The introductory scene, showing ducks swimming in a kettle and quacking merrily, is scored with an instrumental medley of the aforementioned songs, and is also the only scene in the film that has anything remotely to do with ducks or soup.
Reception.
Popular belief holds that "Duck Soup" was a box office failure, but this is not true. Although it did not do as well as "Horse Feathers", it was the sixth-highest grossing film of 1933, according to Glenn Mitchell in "The Marx Brothers Encyclopedia" and Simon Louvish in "Monkey Business", his biography of the Marx Brothers.
One possible reason for the film's lukewarm reception is that it was released during the Great Depression. Audiences were taken aback by such preposterous political disregard, buffoonery, and cynicism at a time of economic and political crisis. Film scholar Leonard Maltin had this to say in his book "The Great Movie Comedians":
As wonderful as "Monkey Business", "Horse Feathers", and "Duck Soup" seem today, some critics and moviegoers found them unpleasant and longed for the more orderly world of "The Cocoanuts" with its musical banalities. [...] Many right-thinkers laughed themselves silly in 1933—but a large number didn't. [...] The unrelieved assault of Marxian comedy was simply too much for some people.
Years later, Groucho's son Arthur Marx described Irving Thalberg's assessment of the film's purported failure during a National Public Radio interview:
said the trouble with "Duck Soup" is you've got funny gags in it, but there's no story and there's nothing to root for. You can't root for the Marx Brothers because they're a bunch of zany kooks. [Thalberg says, "You gotta put a love story in your movie so there'll be something to root for, and you have to help the lovers get together."
Most critics at the time disliked it because of its "dated" look at politics. Some modern critics are also unimpressed. Christopher Null believes, "the send-up of Mussolini-types doesn't quite pan out. Take the comedy, leave the story."
Even Groucho himself did not initially think too highly of the film. When asked the significance of the film's politics, Groucho only shrugged and said: "What significance? We were just four Jews trying to get a laugh." Nevertheless, the Brothers were ecstatic when Benito Mussolini took the film as a personal insult and banned it in Italy. Also, the residents of Fredonia, New York, protested because they feared that the similar-sounding nation would hurt their city's reputation. The Marx Brothers took the opposite approach, telling them to change the name of their town to keep from hurting their movie.
Despite the tepid critical response at the time, "Duck Soup" is now seen as a classic political farce. Film critic Danel Griffin believes that "Duck Soup" is "on par with other war comedies like Chaplin's "The Great Dictator" and Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove", only slightly more unnerving in that "Duck Soup" doesn't seem to realize it is anything more than innocent fluff." Fellow film critic Roger Ebert believed, "The Marx Brothers created a body of work in which individual films are like slices from the whole, but "Duck Soup" is probably the best." British film critic Barry Norman was slightly cautious about the Marx Brothers overall, but considered that "Duck Soup" was their best and included it in his 100 best films of the 20th century.
Revived interest in the film (and other 1930s comedies in general) during the 1960s was seen as dovetailing with the rebellious side of American culture in that decade. American literary critic Harold Bloom considers the end of "Duck Soup" one of the greatest works of American art produced in the 20th century.
In 1990, "Duck Soup" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2000, readers of "Total Film" magazine voted "Duck Soup" the 29th greatest comedy film of all time. The film also holds a 93% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It is also one of the earliest films to appear on Roger Ebert's list of "The Great Movies".
American Film Institute lists:
Influence.
The United States Library of Congress has added "Duck Soup" to the National Film Registry, and the film was included in both the original (1998) broadcast of AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies and the 2007 update.
Another testament to "Duck Soup"'s legacy is its recurring influence in various Woody Allen films. For example, in Allen's "Hannah and Her Sisters" (1986), a chance screening of "Duck Soup" convinces Allen's character that life is still worth living, and he abandons his suicidal impulses. Film critics have dubbed Allen's "Bananas" (1971), a film chronicling the humorous rise of an unlikely dictator, a "spiritual sequel to "Duck Soup"."
"Duck Soup" has had further lasting influence in the world of animation, with homages appearing in various animated television series. The film was spoofed in "Animaniacs" as the full-episode sketch "King Yakko". One specific gag from the original, the constant singing of the Freedonian national anthem, was spoofed in particular with a Perry Como caricature. Groucho's entrance in the film was borrowed in another "Animaniacs" cartoon, "The Three Muska-Warners".
The Freedonian national anthem is alluded to in the "Futurama" episode "Bend Her". Following Bender's victory at the Olympic Games (which he won after disguising himself as a woman to enter the women's division), he sings "Hail, hail Rob-on-i-a, a land I didn't make up!"
"Duck Soup" inspired parts of Sacha Baron Cohen's 2012 film, "The Dictator".
An AV Club critic noted that "Admiral General Aladeen and Rufus T. Firefly share the same bloodline, representing a more generalized contempt for world leaders of any stripe, whether they don a 'supreme beard' or a greasepaint moustache." The "Nashville Scene" detected "an echo here of that funniest of xenophobe-baiting funnies, "Duck Soup"." The "Rolling Stone" claimed that Baron Cohen's film "dodges soothing convention and ultimately merits comparisons to The Marx Brothers' "Duck Soup" and Charlie Chaplin's "The Great Dictator".
DVD release.
Universal Home Video released "Duck Soup" on DVD, unrestored but uncut, as part of a six-disc box set "The Marx Brothers: Silver Screen Collection", which includes also the Brothers' other Paramount films, "The Cocoanuts", "Animal Crackers", "Monkey Business", and "Horse Feathers". Reviewing the set, film critic Mark Bourne writes:

</doc>
<doc id="73441" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73441" title="E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial">
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial

E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial is a 1982 American epic science fiction family film co-produced and directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Spielberg and Melissa Mathison, featuring special effects by Carlo Rambaldi and Dennis Muren, and starring Henry Thomas, Dee Wallace, Robert MacNaughton, Drew Barrymore and Peter Coyote. It tells the story of Elliott (Thomas), a lonely boy who befriends an extraterrestrial, dubbed "E.T.", who is stranded on Earth. He and his siblings help it return home while attempting to keep it hidden from their mother and the government.
The concept for the film was based on an imaginary friend Spielberg created after his parents' divorce in 1960. In 1980, Spielberg met Mathison and developed a new story from the stalled science fiction/horror film project "Night Skies". It was shot from September to December 1981 in California on a budget of US$10.5 million. Unlike most motion pictures, it was shot in rough chronological order, to facilitate convincing emotional performances from the young cast.
Released on June 11, 1982 by Universal Pictures, "E.T" was a blockbuster, surpassing "Star Wars" to become the highest-grossing film of all time—a record it held for eleven years until "Jurassic Park", another Spielberg-directed film, surpassed it in 1993. It is the highest-grossing film of the 1980s. Widely regarded as one of the greatest films of all time, critics acclaimed it as a timeless story of friendship, and it ranks as the greatest science fiction film ever made in a Rotten Tomatoes survey. In 1994, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". It was re-released in 1985, and then again in 2002 to celebrate its 20th anniversary, with altered shots and additional scenes.
Plot.
In a California forest, a group of alien botanists collect flora samples. When government agents appear on the scene, they flee in their spaceship, leaving one of their own behind in their haste. At a suburban home, a ten-year-old boy named Elliott is trying to spend time with his fifteen-year-old brother, Michael, and his friends. As he returns from picking up a pizza, he discovers that something is hiding in their tool shed. The creature promptly flees upon being discovered. Despite his family's disbelief, Elliott leaves Reese's Pieces candy to lure the creature to his bedroom. Before he goes to sleep, he realizes it is imitating his movements. He feigns illness the next morning to stay home from school and play with it. Later that day, Michael and their five-year-old sister, Gertie, meet it. They decide to keep it hidden from their mother, Mary. When they ask it about its origin, it levitates several balls to represent its solar system and then demonstrates its powers by reviving a dead chrysanthemum.
At school the next day, Elliott begins to experience a psychic connection with the alien, including exhibiting signs of intoxication (because it is at his home, drinking beer), and he begins freeing all the frogs in his biology class. As the alien watches John Wayne kiss Maureen O'Hara in "The Quiet Man" on TV, Elliott kisses a girl he likes. He is then sent to the principal's office.
The alien learns to speak English by repeating what Gertie says as she watches "Sesame Street" and, at Elliott's urging, dubs itself "E.T." He reads a comic strip where Buck Rogers, stranded, calls for help by building a makeshift communication device and is inspired to try it himself. E.T. receives Elliott's help in building a device to "phone home" by using a Speak & Spell toy. Michael notices that his health is declining and that Elliott is referring to himself as "we."
On Halloween, Michael and Elliott dress E.T. as a ghost so they can sneak him out of the house. Elliott and E.T. ride the former's bike to the forest, where E.T. makes a successful call home. The next morning, Elliott wakes up in the field, only to find E.T. gone, so he returns home to his distressed family. Michael searches for and finds E.T. dying in a ditch and takes him home to Elliott, who is also dying. Mary becomes frightened when she discovers her son's illness and the dying E.T., just as government agents invade the house. Scientists set up a medical facility there, quarantining Elliott and E.T. Their link disappears and E.T. then appears to die while Elliott recovers. A grief-stricken Elliott is left alone with the motionless E.T. when he notices a dead chrysanthemum, the plant E.T. had previously revived, coming back to life. E.T. reanimates and reveals that his people are returning. Elliott and Michael steal a van that E.T. had been loaded into and a chase ensues, with Michael's friends joining them as they attempt to evade the authorities by bike. Suddenly facing a police roadblock, they escape as E.T. uses telekinesis to lift them into the air and toward the forest.
Standing near the spaceship, E.T.'s heart glows as he prepares to return home. Mary, Gertie, and "Keys," a government agent, show up. E.T. says goodbye to Michael and Gertie, as she presents him with the chrysanthemum that he had revived. Before boarding the spaceship, he tells Elliott "I'll be right here," pointing his glowing finger to his forehead. He then picks up the chrysanthemum, boards the spaceship, and it takes off, leaving a rainbow in the sky as everyone watches it leave.
Cast.
Having worked with Cary Guffey on "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", Spielberg felt confident in working with a cast composed mostly of child actors. For the role of Elliott, he auditioned hundreds of boys before Jack Fisk suggested Henry Thomas for the role because Henry had played the part of Harry in the movie "Raggedy Man" which Jack Fisk had directed. Thomas, who auditioned in an Indiana Jones costume, did not perform well in the formal testing, but got the filmmakers' attention in an improvised scene. Thoughts of his dead dog inspired his convincing tears. Robert MacNaughton auditioned eight times to play Michael, sometimes with boys auditioning for Elliott. Spielberg felt Drew Barrymore had the right imagination for mischievous Gertie after she impressed him with a story that she led a punk rock band. He enjoyed working with the children, and he later said that the experience made him feel ready to be a father.
The major voice work for the film was performed by Pat Welsh, a woman who lived in Marin County, California. She smoked two packets of cigarettes a day, which gave her voice a quality that sound effects creator Ben Burtt liked. She spent nine-and-a-half hours recording her part, and was paid $380 by Burtt for her services. He also recorded 16 other people and various animals to create E.T.'s "voice". These included Spielberg, Debra Winger, his sleeping wife, who had a cold, a burp from his USC film professor, raccoons, otters, and horses.
Doctors working at the USC Medical Center were recruited to play the ones who try to save E.T. after government agents take over Elliott's house. Spielberg felt that actors in the roles, performing lines of technical medical dialogue, would come across as unnatural. During post-production, he decided to cut a scene featuring Harrison Ford as the principal at Elliott's school. It featured his character reprimanding Elliott for his behavior in biology class and warning of the dangers of underage drinking. He is then taken aback as Elliott's chair rises from the floor, while E.T. is levitating his "phone" equipment up the stairs with Gertie.
Production.
Development.
After his parents' divorce in 1960, Spielberg filled the void with an imaginary alien companion. He said that the imaginary alien was "a friend who could be the brother I never had and a father that I didn't feel I had anymore." During 1978, he announced he would shoot a film entitled "Growing Up", which he would film in 28 days. The project was set aside because of delays on "1941", but the concept of making a small autobiographical film about childhood would stay with him. He also thought about a follow-up to "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", and began to develop a darker project he had planned with John Sayles called "Night Skies" in which malevolent aliens terrorize a family.
Filming "Raiders of the Lost Ark" in Tunisia left Spielberg bored, and memories of his childhood creation resurfaced. He told screenwriter Melissa Mathison about "Night Skies", and developed a subplot from the failed project, in which Buddy, the only friendly alien, befriends an autistic child. His abandonment on Earth in the script's final scene inspired the "E.T." concept. She wrote a first draft titled "E.T. and Me" in eight weeks, which he considered perfect. The script went through two more drafts, which deleted an "Eddie Haskell"-esque friend of Elliott. The chase sequence was also created, and he also suggested having the scene where E.T. got drunk. Columbia Pictures, which had been producing "Night Skies", met him to discuss the script. The studio passed on it, calling it "a wimpy Walt Disney movie", so he approached the more receptive Sid Sheinberg, president of MCA.
Pre-production.
Carlo Rambaldi, who designed the aliens for "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", was hired to design the animatronics of E.T. Rambaldi's own painting "Women of Delta" led him to give the creature a unique, extendable neck. Its face was inspired by those of Carl Sandburg, Albert Einstein and Ernest Hemingway. Producer Kathleen Kennedy visited the Jules Stein Eye Institute to study real and glass eyes. She hired Institute staffers to create E.T.'s eyes, which she felt were particularly important in engaging the audience. Four heads were created for filming, one as the main animatronic and the others for facial expressions, as well as a costume. Two dwarfs, Tamara De Treaux and Pat Bilon, as well as 12-year-old Matthew DeMeritt, who was born without legs, took turns wearing the costume, depending on what scene was being filmed. DeMeritt actually walked on his hands and played all scenes where he walked awkwardly or fell over. The head was placed above that of the actors, and the actors could see through slits in its chest. Caprice Roth, a professional mime, filled prosthetics to play E.T.'s hands. The puppet was created in three months at the cost of $1.5 million. Spielberg declared it was "something that only a mother could love." Mars, Incorporated found E.T. so ugly that they refused to allow M&M's to be used in the film, believing the creature would frighten children. This allowed The Hershey Company the opportunity to market Reese's Pieces. Science and technology educator Henry Feinberg created E.T.'s communicator device.
Filming.
The film began shooting in September 1981. The project was filmed under the cover name "A Boy's Life", as Spielberg did not want anyone to discover and plagiarize the plot. The actors had to read the script behind closed doors, and everyone on set had to wear an ID card. The shoot began with two days at a high school in Culver City, and the crew spent the next 11 days moving between locations at Northridge and Tujunga. The next 42 days were spent at Culver City's Laird International Studios, for the interiors of Elliott's home. The crew shot at a redwood forest near Crescent City for the production's last six days. The exterior Halloween scene and the "flying bicycle" chase scenes were filmed in Porter Ranch. Spielberg shot the film in roughly chronological order to achieve convincingly emotional performances from his cast. In the scene in which Michael first encounters E.T., his appearance caused MacNaughton to jump back and knock down the shelves behind him. The chronological shoot gave the young actors an emotional experience as they bonded with E.T., making the hospital sequences more moving. Spielberg ensured the puppeteers were kept away from the set to maintain the illusion of a real alien. For the first time in his career, he did not storyboard most of the film, in order to facilitate spontaneity in the performances. The film was shot so adults, except for Dee Wallace, are never seen from the waist up in its first half, as a tribute to Tex Avery's cartoons. The shoot was completed in 61 days, four days ahead of schedule. According to Spielberg, the memorable scene where E.T. disguises himself as a stuffed toy in Elliott's closet was suggested by colleague Robert Zemeckis, after he read a draft of the screenplay that Spielberg had sent him.
Music.
Longtime Spielberg collaborator John Williams, who composed the film's musical score, described the challenge of creating one that would generate sympathy for such an odd-looking creature. As with their previous collaborations, Spielberg liked every theme Williams composed and had it included. Spielberg loved the music for the final chase so much that he edited the sequence to suit it. Williams took a modernist approach, especially with his use of polytonality, which refers to the sound of two different keys played simultaneously. The Lydian mode can also be used in a polytonal way. Williams combined polytonality and the Lydian mode to express a mystic, dreamlike and heroic quality. His theme—emphasizing coloristic instruments such as the harp, piano, celesta, and other keyboards, as well as percussion—suggests E.T.'s childlike nature and his "machine."
Allegations of plagiarism.
There were allegations that the film was plagiarized from a 1967 script, "The Alien", by Indian Bengali director Satyajit Ray. He stated, ""E.T." would not have been possible without my script of "The Alien" being available throughout the United States in mimeographed copies." Spielberg denied this claim, stating, "I was a kid in high school when his script was circulating in Hollywood." "Star Weekend Magazine" disputes Spielberg's claim, pointing out that he had graduated from high school in 1965 and began his career as a director in Hollywood in 1969. Besides it, some believe that an earlier Spielberg film, "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", was also inspired by "The Alien". Veteran filmmakers Martin Scorsese and Richard Attenborough also pointed out Spielberg's influences from Ray's script.
Themes.
Spielberg drew the story of the film from his parents' divorce; Gary Arnold of "The Washington Post" called it "essentially a spiritual autobiography, a portrait of the filmmaker as a typical suburban kid set apart by an uncommonly fervent, mystical imagination". References to his childhood occur throughout: Elliott fakes illness by holding a thermometer to the bulb in his lamp while covering his face with a heating pad, a trick frequently employed by the young Spielberg. Michael picking on Elliott echoes Spielberg's teasing of his younger sisters, and Michael's evolution from tormentor to protector reflects how Spielberg had to take care of his sisters after their father left.
Critics have focused on the parallels between E.T.'s life and Elliott, who is "alienated" by the loss of his father. A.O. Scott of "The New York Times" wrote that while E.T. "is the more obvious and desperate foundling", Elliott "suffers in his own way from the want of a home." E.T. is the first and last letter of Elliott's name. At the film's heart is the theme of growing up. Critic Henry Sheehan described the film as a retelling of Peter Pan from the perspective of a Lost Boy (Elliott): E.T. cannot survive physically on Earth, as Pan could not survive emotionally in Neverland; government scientists take the place of Neverland's pirates. Vincent Canby of "The New York Times" similarly observed that the film "freely recycles elements from [...] "Peter Pan" and "The Wizard of Oz"". Some critics have suggested that Spielberg's portrayal of suburbia is very dark, contrary to popular belief. According to A.O. Scott, "The suburban milieu, with its unsupervised children and unhappy parents, its broken toys and brand-name junk food, could have come out of a Raymond Carver story." Charles Taylor of Salon.com wrote, "Spielberg's movies, despite the way they're often characterized, are not Hollywood idealizations of families and the suburbs. The homes here bear what the cultural critic Karal Ann Marling called 'the marks of hard use'."
Other critics found religious parallels between E.T. and Jesus. Andrew Nigels described E.T.'s story as "crucifixion by military science" and "resurrection by love and faith". According to Spielberg, biographer Joseph McBride, Universal Pictures appealed directly to the Christian market, with a poster reminiscent of Michelangelo's "The Creation of Adam" and a logo reading "Peace". Spielberg answered that he did not intend the film to be a religious parable, joking, "If I ever went to my mother and said, 'Mom, I've made this movie that's a Christian parable,' what do you think she'd say? She has a Kosher restaurant on Pico and Doheny in Los Angeles."
As a substantial body of film criticism has built up around the film, numerous writers have analyzed it in other ways as well. It has been interpreted as a modern fairy tale and in psychoanalytic terms. Producer Kathleen Kennedy noted that an important theme of "E.T." is tolerance, which would be central to future Spielberg films such as "Schindler's List". Having been a loner as a teenager, Spielberg described it as "a minority story". Spielberg's characteristic theme of communication is partnered with the ideal of mutual understanding: he has suggested that the story's central alien-human friendship is an analogy for how real-world adversaries can learn to overcome their differences.
Reception.
Release and sales.
The film was previewed in Houston, Texas, where it received high marks from viewers. It premiered at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival's closing gala, and was released in the United States on June 11, 1982. It opened at number one with a gross of $11 million, and stayed at the top of the box office for six weeks; it then fluctuated between the first and second positions until October, before returning to the top spot for the final time in December.
In 1983, E.T. surpassed "Star Wars" as the highest-grossing film of all-time, and by the end of its theatrical run it had grossed $359 million in North America and $619 million worldwide. Spielberg earned $500,000 a day from his share of the profits, while The Hershey Company's profits rose 65% due to its prominent use of Reese's Pieces. The "Official E.T. Fan Club" offered photographs, a newsletter that let readers "relive the film's unforgettable moments favorite scenes", and a phonographic record with "phone home" and other sound clips.
The film was re-released in 1985 and 2002, earning another $60 million and $68 million respectively, for a worldwide total of $792 million with North America accounting for $435 million. It held the global record until it was usurped by "Jurassic Park"—another Spielberg-directed film—in 1993, although it managed to hold on to the domestic record for a further four years, where a "Star Wars" reissue reclaimed it. It was eventually released on VHS and laserdisc on October 27, 1988; to combat piracy, the tapeguards and tape hubs on the videocassettes were colored green, the tape itself was affixed with a small, holographic sticker of the 1963 Universal logo (much like the holograms on a credit card), and encoded with Macrovision. In North America alone, VHS sales came to $75 million.
The film was the first major one to have been seriously affected by video piracy. The usual account is that the public in some areas were becoming impatient at long delays getting it to their cinemas; an illegal group realized this, got hold of a copy of it for a night by bribing a projectionist, and made it into a video by projecting it with a sound and video recording device. The resulting video was used as a master to run off very many copies, which were widely sold illegally.
Critical response.
The film received critical acclaim. Roger Ebert wrote, "This is not simply a good movie. It is one of those movies that brush away our cautions and win our hearts." He later added it to his Great Movies list, structuring the essay as a letter to his grandchildren about the first time they watched it.Michael Sragow of "Rolling Stone" called Spielberg "a space age Jean Renoir... the first time, [he has put his breathtaking technical skills at the service of his deepest feelings". Leonard Maltin would include it in his list of "100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century" as one of only two movies from the 1980s. George Will was one of the few to pan the film, feeling it spread subversive notions about childhood and science.
The film holds a 98% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, and a Metacritic score of 94/100. In addition to the many impressed critics, President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan were moved by it after a screening at the White House on June 27, 1982. Princess Diana was even in tears after watching it. On September 17, 1982, it was screened at the United Nations, and Spielberg received the U.N. Peace Medal.
Awards and honors.
The film was nominated for nine Oscars at the 55th Academy Awards, including Best Picture. "Gandhi" won that award, but its director, Richard Attenborough, declared, "I was certain that not only would "E.T." win, but that it should win. It was inventive, powerful, wonderful. I make more mundane movies." It won four Academy Awards: Best Original Score, Best Sound (Robert Knudson, Robert Glass, Don Digirolamo, Gene Cantamessa), Best Sound Effects Editing (Charles L. Campbell and Ben Burtt), and Best Visual Effects (Carlo Rambaldi, Dennis Muren and Kenneth F. Smith).
At the 40th Golden Globe Awards, the film won Best Picture in the Drama category and Best Score; it was also nominated for Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best New Male Star for Henry Thomas. The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film Best Picture, Best Director, and a "New Generation Award" for Melissa Mathison.
The film won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Special Effects, Best Music, and Best Poster Art, while Henry Thomas, Robert McNaughton, and Drew Barrymore won Young Artist Awards. In addition to his Golden Globe and Saturn, composer John Williams won 2 Grammy Awards and a BAFTA for the score. It was also honored abroad: it won the Best Foreign Language Film award at the Blue Ribbon Awards in Japan, Cinema Writers Circle Awards in Spain, César Awards in France, and David di Donatello in Italy.
In American Film Institute polls, the film has been voted the 24th greatest film of all time, the 44th most heart-pounding, and the sixth most inspiring. Other AFI polls rated it as having the 14th greatest music score and as the third greatest science-fiction one. The line "E.T. phone home" was ranked 15th on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes list, and 48th on "Premiere"'s top movie quote list. The character of Elliott was nominated for AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains as one of the 50 greatest heroes. In 2005, it topped a Channel 4 poll of the 100 greatest family ones, and was also listed by "Time" as one of the 100 best ones ever made.
In 2003, "Entertainment Weekly" called the film the eighth most "tear-jerking"; in 2007, in a survey of both films and television series, the magazine declared it the seventh greatest work of science-fiction media in the past 25 years. "The Times" also named it as their ninth favorite alien in a film, calling it "one of the best-loved non-humans in popular culture". It is among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14. In 1994, it was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry.
In 2011, ABC aired "", revealing the results of a poll of fans conducted by ABC and "People" magazine: it was selected as the fifth best film of all time and the second best science fiction film.
On October 22, 2012, Madame Tussauds unveiled wax likenesses of E.T. at six of its international locations.
20th Anniversary Version.
An extended version of the film, including altered special effects, was released on March 22, 2002. Certain shots of E.T. had bothered Spielberg since 1982, as he did not have enough time to perfect the animatronics. Computer-generated imagery (CGI), provided by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), was used to modify several shots, including ones of E.T. running in the opening sequence and being spotted in the cornfield. The spaceship's design was also altered to include more lights. Scenes shot for but not included in the original version were introduced. These included E.T. taking a bath, and Gertie telling Mary that Elliott went to the forest on Halloween. Spielberg did not add the scene featuring Harrison Ford, feeling that would reshape the film too drastically. He became more sensitive about the scene where gun-wielding federal agents confront Elliott and his escaping friends and had them digitally replaced with walkie-talkies.
At the premiere, John Williams conducted a live performance of the score. The new release grossed $68 million in total, with $35 million coming from Canada and the United States. The changes to it, particularly the escape scene, were criticized as political correctness. Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" wondered, "Remember those guns the feds carried? Thanks to the miracle of digital, they're now brandishing walkie-talkies... Is this what two decades have done to free speech?" Chris Hewitt of "Empire" wrote, "The changes are surprisingly low-key...while ILM's CGI E.T. is used sparingly as a complement to Carlo Rambaldi's extraordinary puppet." "South Park" ridiculed many of the changes in the 2002 episode "Free Hat".
The two-disc DVD release which followed in October 22, 2002 contained the original theatrical and 20th Anniversary extended versions of the film. Spielberg personally demanded the release to feature both versions. The two-disc edition, as well as a three-disc collector's edition containing a "making of" book and special features that were unavailable on the two-disc edition, were placed in moratorium on December 31, 2002. Later, it was re-released on DVD as a single-disc re-issue in 2005, featuring only the 20th Anniversary version.
In a June 2011 interview, Spielberg said that in the future
There's going to be no more digital enhancements or digital additions to anything based on any film I direct... When people ask me which "E.T." they should look at, I always tell them to look at the original 1982 "E.T." If you notice, when we did put out "E.T." we put out two "E.T."s. We put out the digitally enhanced version with the additional scenes and for no extra money, in the same package, we put out the original '82 version. I always tell people to go back to the '82 version.
Other portrayals.
In July 1982, during the film's first theatrical run, Spielberg and Mathison wrote a treatment for a sequel to be titled "E.T. II: Nocturnal Fears". It would have shown Elliott and his friends getting kidnapped by evil aliens and follow their attempts to contact E.T. for help. Spielberg decided against pursuing it, feeling it "would do nothing but rob the original of its virginity".
Atari, Inc. made a video game based on the film for the Atari 2600. Released in 1982, it was widely considered to be one of the worst video games ever made.
William Kotzwinkle, author of the film's novelization, wrote a sequel, "E.T.: The Book of the Green Planet", which was published in 1985. In the novel, E.T. returns home to the planet Brodo Asogi, but is subsequently demoted and sent into exile. He then attempts to return to Earth by effectively breaking all of Brodo Asogi's laws. "E.T. Adventure", a theme park ride, debuted at Universal Studios Florida in 1990. The $40 million attraction features the title character saying goodbye to visitors by name.
In 1998, E.T. was licensed to appear in television public service announcements produced by the Progressive Corporation. The announcements featured his voice reminding drivers to "buckle up" their seat belts. Traffic signs depicting a stylized E.T. wearing one were installed on selected roads around the United States. The following year, British Telecommunications launched the "Stay in Touch" campaign, with him as the star of various advertisements. The campaign's slogan was "B.T. has E.T.", with "E.T." also taken to mean "extra technology". At Spielberg's suggestion, George Lucas included members of E.T.'s species as background characters in "" (1999).

</doc>
<doc id="73443" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73443" title="Character (computing)">
Character (computing)

In computer and machine-based telecommunications terminology, a character is a unit of information that roughly corresponds to a grapheme, grapheme-like unit, or symbol, such as in an alphabet or syllabary in the written form of a natural language.
Examples of characters include letters, numerical digits, common punctuation marks (such as "." or "-"), and whitespace. The concept also includes control characters, which do not correspond to symbols in a particular natural language, but rather to other bits of information used to process text in one or more languages. Examples of control characters include carriage return or tab, as well as instructions to printers or other devices that display or otherwise process text.
Characters are typically combined into strings.
Character encoding.
Computers and communication equipment represent characters using a character encoding that assigns each character to something — an integer quantity represented by a sequence of digits, typically — that can be stored or transmitted through a network. Two examples of usual encodings are ASCII and the UTF-8 encoding for Unicode. While most character encodings map characters to numbers and/or bit sequences, Morse code instead represents characters using a series of electrical impulses of varying length.
Terminology.
Historically, the term "character" has been widely used by industry professionals to refer to an "encoded character", often as defined by the programming language or API. Likewise, "character set" has been widely used to refer to a specific repertoire of characters that have been mapped to specific bit sequences or numerical codes. The term glyph is used to describe a particular visual appearance of a character. Many computer fonts consist of glyphs that are indexed by the numerical code of the corresponding character.
With the advent and widespread acceptance of Unicode and bit-agnostic "coded character sets", a character is increasingly being seen as a unit of information, independent of any particular visual manifestation. The ISO/IEC 10646 (Unicode) International Standard defines "character", or "abstract character" as "a member of a set of elements used for the organisation, control, or representation of data". Unicode's definition supplements this with explanatory notes that encourage the reader to differentiate between characters, graphemes, and glyphs, among other things. Such differentiation is an instance of the wider theme of the separation of presentation and content.
For example, the Hebrew letter aleph ("א") is often used by mathematicians to denote certain kinds of infinity, but it is also used in ordinary Hebrew text. In Unicode, these two uses are considered different characters, and have two different Unicode numerical identifiers ("code points"), though they may be rendered identically. Conversely, the Chinese logogram for water ("水") may have a slightly different appearance in Japanese texts than it does in Chinese texts, and local typefaces may reflect this. But nonetheless in Unicode they are considered the same character, and share the same code point.
The Unicode standard also differentiates between these abstract characters and "coded characters" or "encoded characters" that have been paired with numeric codes that facilitate their representation in computers.
Combining character.
The combining character is also addressed by Unicode. For instance, Unicode allocates a code point to each of i, ["](combining trema) and ï (U+00ef). This makes it possible to code the middle character of the word naïve both as a single code point 'ï' or as a combination of the character i with diacritic (") (U+0069 LATIN SMALL LETTER I + U+0308 COMBINING DIAERESIS).
Both are considered canonically equivalent by the Unicode standard.
char.
A codice_1 in the C programming language is a data type with the size of exactly one byte, which in turn is defined to be large enough to contain any member of the “basic execution character set” and (in newer C standards) UTF-8 code units which implies a minimum size of 8 bits. The exact number of bits can be checked via codice_2 macro. By far the most common size is 8 bits, and the POSIX standard "requires" it to be 8 bits.
Since Unicode requires at least 21 bits to store a single code point, it is usually impossible to store one inside a single codice_1; instead a variable-length encoding such as UTF-8 must be used. Unfortunately, the fact that a character was historically stored in a single byte led to the two terms being used interchangeably in most documentation. This often makes the documentation confusing or misleading when multibyte encodings such as UTF-8 are used, and has led to inefficient and incorrect implementations of string manipulation functions. Modern POSIX documentation attempts to fix this, defining “character” as a sequence of one or more bytes representing a single graphic symbol or control code, and attempts to use “byte” when referring to char data. However it defines "Character Array" as an array of elements of type char.
Unicode can also be stored in strings made up of code units that are larger than codice_1. These are called “wide characters”. The original C type was called codice_5. Due to some platforms defining codice_5 as 16 bits and others defining it as 32 bits, recent versions have added codice_7, codice_8. Even then the objects being stored might not be characters, for instance the variable-length UTF-16 is often stored in arrays of codice_7.
Other languages also have a codice_1 type. Some such as C++ use 8 bits like C. Others such as Java use 16 bits for codice_1, in order to represent UTF-16 values.
Word character.
A "word" character has special meaning in some aspects of computing. A "word character" within ASCII typically means a letter of the alphabet A-Z (upper or lower case), the digits 0 to 9, and the underscore.
It might be dependent on localization and encoding in use. If $ or | are not a word character, 'é' (in French) or 'æ' or 'я' (in Russian) or 'ά' (in Greek) are, as used in words such as fédération, Αγορά, or Примечания.

</doc>
<doc id="73444" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73444" title="Easy Rider">
Easy Rider

Easy Rider is a 1969 American road movie written by Peter Fonda, Dennis Hopper, and Terry Southern, produced by Fonda and directed by Hopper. It tells the story of two bikers (played by Fonda and Hopper) who travel through the American Southwest and South to sell marijuana. The success of "Easy Rider" helped spark the New Hollywood phase of filmmaking during the early 1970s. The film was added to the Library of Congress National Registry in 1998.
A landmark counterculture film, and a "touchstone for a generation" that "captured the national imagination", "Easy Rider" explores the societal landscape, issues, and tensions in the United States during the 1960s, such as the rise and fall of the hippie movement, drug use, and communal lifestyle.
In "Easy Rider", real drugs were used in scenes showing the use of marijuana and other substances.
Plot.
The protagonists are two freewheeling guys: Wyatt (Fonda), nicknamed "Captain America", and Billy (Hopper). Fonda and Hopper have said that these characters' names refer to Wyatt Earp and Billy the Kid. Wyatt dresses in American flag-adorned leather (with an Office of the Secretary of Defense Identification Badge affixed to it), while Billy dresses in Native American-style buckskin pants and shirts and a bushman hat. The former is quite open to people they meet on their journey and accepting of help while the latter is more hostile and suspicious.
After smuggling cocaine from Mexico to Los Angeles, Wyatt and Billy sell their haul to "Connection", a man (played by Phil Spector) in a Rolls-Royce, and receive a large sum in return. With the money stuffed into a plastic tube hidden inside the Stars & Stripes-painted fuel tank of Wyatt's California-style chopper, they ride eastward aiming to reach New Orleans, Louisiana, in time for the Mardi Gras festival.
During their trip Wyatt and Billy stop to repair one of the bikes at a farmstead and have a meal with the farmer and his family. Wyatt seems to appreciate the simple, traditional lifestyle presented here. Later Wyatt stops to pick up a hippyish hitch-hiker (Luke Askew) and he invites them to visit his commune, where they stay for the rest of the day. Life in the commune appears to be hard, with young hippies from the city struggling to grow their own crops in a dry climate with poor soil and little rainfall. (One of the children seen in the commune is played by Fonda's four-year-old daughter Bridget.) At one point, the bikers witness a prayer for blessing of the new crop, as put by a commune-member: A chance "to make a stand", and to plant "simple food, for our simple taste". The commune is also hosting a traveling theater group that "sings for its supper" (performs for food). The notion of "free love" appears to be practiced, with two of the women, Lisa (Luana Anders) and Sarah (Sabrina Scharf), seemingly sharing the affections of the hitch-hiking commune-member before turning their attention to Wyatt and Billy. The hitch-hiker asks the two bikers to stay at the commune, saying, "the time is now", to which Wyatt replies "I'm hip about time...but I just gotta go." As the bikers leave, the hitch-hiker (known only as "Stranger on highway" in the credits) gives Wyatt some LSD for him to share with "the right people".
Later, while naughtily riding along with a parade in a small town, the pair are arrested by the local authorities for "parading without a permit" and thrown in jail. There, they befriend American Civil Liberties Union lawyer and local drunk George Hanson (Jack Nicholson) who has spent the night in jail after overindulging in alcohol. George helps them get out of jail and decides to travel with Wyatt and Billy to New Orleans. As they camp that night, Wyatt and Billy introduce George to marijuana. As an alcoholic and a "square", George is reluctant to try the marijuana ("It leads to harder stuff", and "I don't want to get hooked"), but he quickly relents.
Stopping to eat at a smalltown Louisiana diner, the trio's appearance attracts the attention of the locals. The girls in the restaurant think they're exciting but the local men and a police officer begin making loud and denigrating comments and taunts. One of the men menacingly states, "I don't believe they'll make the parish line." The waitress does not take their order and Wyatt, Billy and George, feeling the hostility, decide to leave without any fuss. They make camp outside town. The events of the day cause George to comment: "This used to be a hell of a good country. I can't understand what's gone wrong with it." He observes that Americans talk a lot about the value of freedom but are actually afraid of anyone who truly exhibits it.
In the middle of the night a group of locals attack the sleeping trio, beating them with clubs. Billy screams and brandishes a knife and the attackers leave. Wyatt and Billy suffer minor injuries but George has been fatally beaten. Wyatt and Billy wrap George's body up in his sleeping bag, gather his belongings, and vow to return the items to his parents.
They continue to New Orleans and find a brothel George had told them about. Taking prostitutes Karen (Karen Black) and Mary (Toni Basil) with them, Wyatt and Billy decide to go outside and wander the parade-filled street of the Mardi Gras celebration. They end up in a cemetery, where all four ingest the LSD which the hitch-hiker had given to Wyatt. They experience a bad trip, cinematically presented by the use of quick cuts, fish-eye lenses, sound collages (including snippets of prayer) and over-exposed film.
Making camp afterward, Billy declares that their trek has been a success. Wyatt disagrees, declaring, "We blew it." The next morning, the two are continuing their trip eastward to Florida (where they hope to retire wealthy) when two rednecks in a pickup truck spot them and decide to "scare the hell out of them" with their shotgun. As they pull alongside Billy, one of the men lazily aims the shotgun at him and threatens and insults him by saying, "Want me to blow your brains out?" and "Why don't you get a haircut?" When Billy flips his middle finger up at them, the hillbilly fires the shotgun and Billy slews the bike into the roadside, seriously wounded in the side. As the truck then takes off past Wyatt down the road, Wyatt turns around and races back to put his jacket over his critically injured friend, who is already drenched in blood, before riding off for help. By this time, the pickup truck has turned around and closes on Wyatt. The hillbilly fires at Wyatt as he speeds by the pickup, hitting the bike's gas tank and causing it to erupt into a fiery explosion. Wyatt is killed and the bike soars into the air and crashes down further along the road. As the murderous rednecks drive away, the film ends with a shot of the flaming bike in the middle of the deserted road, as the camera ascends to the sky.
Cast.
Commune
Jail
Café
House of Blue Lights
Pickup Truck
Production.
Hopper and Fonda's first collaboration was in "The Trip" (1967), written by Jack Nicholson, which had similar themes and characters as "Easy Rider". Peter Fonda had become "an icon of the counterculture" in "The Wild Angels" (1966), where he established "a persona he would develop further in "The Trip" and "Easy Rider"." "The Trip" also popularized LSD, while "Easy Rider" went on to "celebrate 60s counterculture" but does so "stripped of its innocence." Author Katie Mills wrote that "The Trip" is a way point along the "metamorphosis of the rebel road story from a Beat relic into its hippie reincarnation as "Easy Rider"", and connected Peter Fonda's characters in those two films, along with his character in "The Wild Angels", deviating from the "formulaic biker" persona and critiquing "commodity-oriented filmmakers appropriating avant-garde film techniques." It was also a step in the transition from independent film into Hollywood's mainstream, and while "The Trip" was criticized as a faux, popularized underground film made by Hollywood insiders, "Easy Rider" "interrogates" the attitude that underground film must "remain strictly segregated from Hollywood." Mills also wrote that the famous acid trip scene in "Easy Rider" "clearly derives from their first tentative explorations as filmmakers in "The Trip"."
When seeing a still of himself and Bruce Dern in "The Wild Angels", Peter Fonda had the idea of a modern Western, involving two bikers travelling around the country and eventually getting shot by hillbillies. He called Dennis Hopper, and the two decided to turn that into a movie, "The Loners", with Hopper directing, Fonda producing, and both starring and writing. They brought in screenwriter Terry Southern, who came up with the title "Easy Rider". The film was mostly shot without a screenplay, with ad-libbed lines, and production started with only the outline and the names of the protagonists. Keeping the Western theme, Wyatt was named after Wyatt Earp and Billy after Billy the Kid. However, Southern disputes that Hopper wrote much of the script. In a 2016 interview he said "You know if Den Hopper improvises a dozen lines and six of them survive the cutting room floor he'll put in for screenplay credit. Now it would be almost impossible to exaggerate his contribution to the film—but, by George, he manages to do it every time." According to Southern, Fonda was under contract to produce a motorcycle film with A.I.P., which Fonda had agreed to allow Hopper to direct. According to Southern, Fonda and Hopper didn't seek screenplay credit until after the first screenings of the film, which required Southern's agreement due to writers guild policies. Southern says he agreed out of a sense of camaraderie, and that Hopper later took credit for the entire script.
Hopper was also said to be difficult on set. During test shooting on location in New Orleans, Hopper fought with the production's ad hoc crew for control. At one point he entered into a physical confrontation with photographer Barry Feinstein, who was one of the camera operators for the shoot. After this turmoil, Hopper and Fonda decided to assemble a proper crew for the rest of the film.
Allegedly, the characters of Wyatt and Billy were respectively based on Roger McGuinn and David Crosby of The Byrds. According to Terry Southern's biographer, Lee Hill, the part of George Hanson had been written for Southern's friend, actor Rip Torn. When Torn met with Hopper and Fonda at a New York restaurant in early 1968 to discuss the role, Hopper began ranting about the "rednecks" he had encountered on his scouting trip to the South. Torn, a Texan, took exception to some of Hopper's remarks, and the two almost came to blows, as a result of which Torn withdrew from the project. Torn was replaced by Jack Nicholson, whom Hopper had recently appeared with in "Head" (along with another "Easy Rider" co-star, Toni Basil). In 1994, Jay Leno interviewed Hopper about "Easy Rider "on "The Tonight Show", and during the interview, Hopper alleged that Torn had pulled a knife on him during the altercation, prompting Torn to sue Hopper successfully for defamation.
The hippie commune was recreated from pictures and shot at a site overlooking Malibu Canyon, since the New Buffalo commune in Arroyo Hondo near Taos, New Mexico, did not permit shooting there.
A short clip near the beginning of the film shows Wyatt and Billy on Route 66 in Flagstaff, Arizona, passing a large figure of a lumberjack. That lumberjack statue—once situated in front of the Lumberjack Cafe—remains in Flagstaff, but now stands inside the J. Lawrence Walkup Skydome on the campus of Northern Arizona University. A second, very similar statue was also moved from the Lumberjack Cafe to the exterior of the Skydome.
Most of the film is shot outside with natural lighting. Hopper said all the outdoor shooting was an intentional choice on his part, because "God is a great gaffer." The production used two five-ton trucks, one for the equipment and one for the motorcycles, with the cast and crew in a motor home. One of the locations was Monument Valley.
The restaurant scenes with Fonda, Hopper, and Nicholson were shot in Morganza, Louisiana. The men and girls in that scene were all Morganza locals. In order to inspire more vitriolic commentary from the local men, Hopper told them the characters of Billy, Wyatt, and George had raped and killed a girl outside of town. The scene in which Billy and Wyatt were shot was filmed on Louisiana Highway 105 North, just outside Krotz Springs, and the two other men in the scene—Johnny David and D.C. Billodeau—were Krotz Springs locals.
While shooting the cemetery scene, Hopper tried to convince Fonda to talk to the statue of the Madonna as though it were Fonda's mother (who had committed suicide when he was 10 years old) and ask her why she left him. Although Fonda was reluctant, he eventually complied. Later, Fonda used the inclusion of this scene as leverage to persuade Roger McGuinn to allow the use of his cover of Bob Dylan's "It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)".
Despite being filmed in the first half of 1968, roughly between Mardi Gras and the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy, with production starting on February 22 the film did not have a U.S. premiere until July 1969, after having won an award at the Cannes film festival in May. The delay was partially due to a protracted editing process. Inspired by ""', one of Hopper's proposed cuts was 220 minutes long, including extensive use of the "flash-forward" narrative device, wherein scenes from later in the movie are inserted into the current scene. But only one flash-forward survives in the final edit: when Wyatt in the New Orleans brothel has a premonition of the final scene. At the request of Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider, Henry Jaglom was brought in to edit the film into its current form, while Schneider purchased Hopper a trip to Taos so he would not interfere with the recut. Upon seeing the final cut, Hopper was originally displeased, saying that his movie was "turned into a TV show", but he eventually accepted, claiming that Jaglom had crafted the film the way Hopper had originally intended. Despite the large part he played in shaping the film, Jaglom only received credit as an "Editorial Consultant".
There are various reports about the exact running time of original rough cut of the movie; four hours, four and a half hours, or five hours. All deleted footage is believed to be lost. Some of the scenes which were in the original cut but got deleted are: the original opening showing Wyatt and Billy performing in a Los Angeles stunt show (their real jobs), the two of them being ripped off by the promoter, getting in a biker fight, picking up women at a drive-in, cruising to and escaping from Mexico to score the cocaine they sell, an elaborate police and helicopter chase that took place at the beginning after the dope deal with police chasing Wyatt and Billy over mountains and across the Mexican border, the road trip out of L.A. edited to the full length of Steppenwolf's "Born to Be Wild" with billboards along the way offering wry commentary, Wyatt and Billy being pulled over by a cop while driving their motorcycles across a highway, the two of them encountering the black motorcycle gang, ten additional minutes for the volatile café scene in Louisiana where George deftly keeps the peace, Wyatt and Billy checking into a hotel before going over to Madam Tinkertoy's, an extended and much longer Madam Tinkertoy sequence, and extended versions of all the campfire scenes including the enigmatic finale in which Wyatt says "We blew it, Billy".
"Easy Rider"'s style — the jump cuts, time shifts, flash forwards, flashbacks, jerky hand-held cameras, fractured narrative and improvised acting — can be seen as a cinematic translation of the psychedelic experience. Peter Biskind, author of "Easy Riders, Raging Bulls" wrote: "LSD did create a frame of mind that fractured experience and that LSD experience had an effect on films like Easy Rider".
Motorcycles.
The motorcycles for the film, based on hardtail frames and panhead engines, were designed and built by two African-American chopper builders — Cliff Vaughs and Ben Hardy — following ideas of Peter Fonda, and handled by Tex Hall and Dan Haggerty during shooting.
In total, four former police bikes were used in the film. The 1949, 1950 and 1952 Harley-Davidson "Hydra-Glide" bikes were purchased at an auction for $500, equivalent to about $ in . Each bike had a backup to make sure that shooting could continue in case one of the old machines failed or got wrecked accidentally. One "Captain America" was demolished in the final scene, while the other three were stolen and probably taken apart before their significance as movie props became known. The demolished bike was rebuilt by Dan Haggerty and shown in a museum. He sold it at an auction in 2001. It now resides at the National Motorcycle Museum in Anamosa, Iowa. Many replicas have been built since the film's release.
Hopper and Fonda hosted a wrap party for the movie and then realized they had not yet shot the final campfire scene. Thus, it was shot after the bikes had already been stolen, which is why they are not visible in the background as in the other campfire scenes.
Reception.
The film holds an 86% "Certified Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 44 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10.
Awards and honors.
Hopper received the First Film Award ("Prix de la première œuvre") at the 1969 Cannes Film Festival. At the 42nd Academy Awards, Jack Nicholson was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and the film was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay.
The film appears at number 88 on the American Film Institute's list of 100 Years, 100 Movies. In 1998, "Easy Rider" was added to the United States National Film Registry, having been deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
Significance.
A box office smash with a $60-million intake, of which $41.7 million was domestic gross, it became the third highest grossing film of 1969. Along with "Bonnie and Clyde" and "The Graduate", "Easy Rider" helped kick-start the New Hollywood phase during the late 1960s and early 1970s. The major studios realized that money could be made from low-budget films made by avant-garde directors. Heavily influenced by the French New Wave, the films of the so-called "post-classical Hollywood" came to represent a counterculture generation increasingly disillusioned with its government as well as the government's effects on the world at large, and the Establishment in general. Although Jack Nicholson appears only as a supporting actor and in the last half of the film, the standout performance signaled his arrival as a movie star, along with his subsequent film "Five Easy Pieces" in which he had the lead role. Vice President Spiro Agnew criticized "Easy Rider", along with the band Jefferson Airplane, as examples of the permissiveness of the 1960s counterculture.
The film's success, and the new era of Hollywood that it helped usher in, gave Hopper the chance to direct again with complete artistic control. The result was 1971's "The Last Movie", which was a notable box office and critical failure, effectively ending Hopper's career as a director for well over a decade.
Roger Ebert added "Easy Rider" to his "Great Movies" list in 2004.
Music.
The movie's "groundbreaking" soundtrack featured The Band, The Byrds, The Jimi Hendrix Experience and Steppenwolf. Editor Donn Cambern used various music from his own record collection to make watching hours of bike footage more interesting during editing. Most of Cambern's music was used, with licensing costs of $1 million, more than the film's budget. When the band Crosby, Stills, Nash, & Young viewed a rough cut of the film, they assured Hopper that they could not do any better than he already had.
Bob Dylan was asked to contribute music, but was reluctant to use his own recording of "It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)", so a version performed by Byrds frontman Roger McGuinn was used instead. Also, instead of writing an entirely new song for the film, Dylan simply wrote out the first verse of "Ballad of Easy Rider" and told the filmmakers, "Give this to McGuinn, he’ll know what to do with it." McGuinn completed the song and performed it in the film.
Home media.
The film was released by The Criterion Collection in November 2010 as part of the box set "America Lost and Found: The BBS Story". It included two audio commentaries, one featuring actor-director-writer Dennis Hopper, the other with Hopper, actor-writer Peter Fonda, and production manager Paul Lewis; two documentaries about the making and history of the film, "Born to Be Wild" (1995) and "Easy Rider: Shaking the Cage" (1999); television excerpts showing Hopper and Fonda at the Cannes Film Festival; and a new video interview with BBS co-founder Stephen Blauner.
Sequel.
In 2012, a sequel to the movie was released titled "", directed by Dustin Rikert. The film is about the family of Wyatt "Captain America" Williams from the 1940s to the present day.

</doc>
<doc id="73447" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73447" title="Eaux d'Artifice">
Eaux d'Artifice

"Eaux d'artifice" (1953) is a short experimental film by Kenneth Anger. The film was shot in the Villa d'Este in Tivoli, Italy. The film consists entirely of a woman dressed in eighteenth-century clothes who wanders amidst the garden fountains of the Villa d'Este ("a Hide and Seek in a night-time labyrinth") to the sounds of Vivaldi's "Four Seasons", until she steps into a fountain and momentarily disappears. The actress, Carmilla Salvatorelli (not "Carmello"), was "a little midget" Anger had met through Federico Fellini. Anger used a short actress to suggest a different sense of scale, whereby the monuments seemed bigger (a technique he said was inspired by etchings of the gardens in the Villa d'Este by Giovanni Battista Piranesi).
The title, a play on words, is meant to suggest "Feux d'artifice" ("Fireworks"), in obvious reference to Anger's earlier 1947 work. Film critic Scott MacDonald has suggested that "Fireworks" was a film about the repression of (the filmmaker's) gay sexuality in the United States, whereas "Eaux d'Artifice" "suggests an explosion of pleasure and freedom."
In 1993, this short film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

</doc>
<doc id="73448" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73448" title="Mangrove">
Mangrove

Mangroves are shrubs or small trees that grow in coastal saline or brackish water. The term is also used for tropical coastal vegetation consisting of such species. Mangroves occur worldwide in the tropics and subtropics, mainly between latitudes ° N and ° S. In the year 2000, the area of mangroves was 53,190 square miles (137,760 km²), spanning 118 countries and territories.
Mangroves are salt tolerant trees, also called halophytes, and are adapted to life in harsh coastal conditions. They contain a complex salt filtration system and complex root system to cope with salt water immersion and wave action. They are adapted to the low oxygen (anoxic) conditions of waterlogged mud.
The word is used in at least three senses: (1) most broadly to refer to the habitat and entire plant assemblage or "mangal", for which the terms "mangrove forest biome", "mangrove swamp" and "mangrove forest" are also used, (2) to refer to all trees and large shrubs in the mangrove swamp, and (3) narrowly to refer to the mangrove family of plants, the Rhizophoraceae, or even more specifically just to mangrove trees of the genus "Rhizophora".
The mangrove biome, or mangal, is a distinct saline woodland or shrubland habitat characterized by depositional coastal environments, where fine sediments (often with high organic content) collect in areas protected from high-energy wave action. The saline conditions tolerated by various mangrove species range from brackish water, through pure seawater (30 to 40 ppt per thousand), to water concentrated by evaporation to over twice the salinity of ocean seawater (up to 90 ppt).
Etymology.
The term "mangrove" comes to English from Spanish (perhaps by way of Portuguese), and is likely to originate from Guarani. It was earlier "mangrow" (from Portuguese ' or Spanish '), but this word was corrupted via folk etymology influence of the word "grove".
Ecology.
Mangrove swamps are found in tropical and subtropical tidal areas. Areas where mangal occurs include estuaries and marine shorelines.
The intertidal existence to which these trees are adapted represents the major limitation to the number of species able to thrive in their habitat. High tide brings in salt water, and when the tide recedes, solar evaporation of the seawater in the soil leads to further increases in salinity. The return of tide can flush out these soils, bringing them back to salinity levels comparable to that of seawater.
At low tide, organisms are also exposed to increases in temperature and desiccation, and are then cooled and flooded by the tide. Thus, for a plant to survive in this environment, it must tolerate broad ranges of salinity, temperature, and moisture, as well as a number of other key environmental factors — thus only a select few species make up the mangrove tree community.
About 110 species are considered "mangroves", in the sense of being a tree that grows in such a saline swamp, though only a few are from the mangrove plant genus, "Rhizophora". However, a given mangrove swamp typically features only a small number of tree species. It is not uncommon for a mangrove forest in the Caribbean to feature only three or four tree species. For comparison, the tropical rainforest biome contains thousands of tree species, but this is not to say mangrove forests lack diversity. Though the trees themselves are few in species, the ecosystem that these trees create provides a home (habitat) for a great variety of other organisms.
Mangrove plants require a number of physiological adaptations to overcome the problems of anoxia, high salinity and frequent tidal inundation. Each species has its own solutions to these problems; this may be the primary reason why, on some shorelines, mangrove tree species show distinct zonation. Small environmental variations within a mangal may lead to greatly differing methods for coping with the environment. Therefore, the mix of species is partly determined by the tolerances of individual species to physical conditions, such as tidal inundation and salinity, but may also be influenced by other factors, such as predation of plant seedlings by crabs.
Once established, mangrove roots provide an oyster habitat and slow water flow, thereby enhancing sediment deposition in areas where it is already occurring. The fine, anoxic sediments under mangroves act as sinks for a variety of heavy (trace) metals which colloidal particles in the sediments have scavenged from the water. Mangrove removal disturbs these underlying sediments, often creating problems of trace metal contamination of seawater and biota.
Mangrove swamps protect coastal areas from erosion, storm surge (especially during hurricanes), and tsunamis. The mangroves' massive root systems are efficient at dissipating wave energy. Likewise, they slow down tidal water enough so its sediment is deposited as the tide comes in, leaving all except fine particles when the tide ebbs. In this way, mangroves build their own environments. Because of the uniqueness of mangrove ecosystems and the protection against erosion they provide, they are often the object of conservation programs, including national biodiversity action plans.
However, mangrove swamps' protective value is sometimes overstated. Wave energy is typically low in areas where mangroves grow, so their effect on erosion can only be measured over long periods. Their capacity to limit high-energy wave erosion is limited to events such as storm surges and tsunamis. Erosion often occurs on the outer sides of bends in river channels that wind through mangroves, while new stands of mangroves are appearing on the inner sides where sediment is accruing.
The unique ecosystem found in the intricate mesh of mangrove roots offers a quiet marine region for young organisms. In areas where roots are permanently submerged, the organisms they host include algae, barnacles, oysters, sponges, and bryozoans, which all require a hard surface for anchoring while they filter feed. Shrimps and mud lobsters use the muddy bottoms as their home. Mangrove crabs munch on the mangrove leaves, adding nutritients to the mangal muds for other bottom feeders. In at least some cases, export of carbon fixed in mangroves is important in coastal food webs.
Mangrove plantations in Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines and India host several commercially important species of fishes and crustaceans. Despite restoration efforts, developers and others have removed over half of the world's mangroves in recent times.
Mangrove forests can decay into peat deposits because of fungal and bacterial processes as well as by the action of termites. It becomes peat in good geochemical, sedimentary and tectonic conditions. The nature of these deposits depends on the environment and the types of mangrove involved. In Puerto Rico the red (Rhizophora mangle), white (Laguncularia racemosa) and black (Avicennia germinans) mangroves occupy different ecological niches and have slightly different chemical compositions so the carbon content varies between the species as well between the different tissues of the plant e.g. leaf matter vs roots.
In Puerto Rico there is a clear succession of these three trees from the lower elevations which are dominated by red mangroves to farther inland with a higher concentration of white mangroves. Mangrove forests are an important part of the cycling and storage of carbon in tropical coastal ecosystems. Using this it is possible to attempt to reconstruct the environment and investigate changes to the coastal ecosystem for thousands of years by using sediment cores. However, an additional complication is the imported marine organic matter that also gets deposited in the sediment due to tidal flushing of mangrove forests.
In order to understand peat formation by mangroves, it is important to understand the conditions they grew in, and how they decayed. Termites are an important part of this decay, and so an understanding of their action on the organic matter is crucial to the chemical stabilization of mangrove peats.
Biology.
Of the recognized 110 mangrove species, only about 54 species in 20 genera from 16 families constitute the "true mangroves", species that occur almost exclusively in mangrove habitats. Demonstrating convergent evolution, many of these species found similar solutions to the tropical conditions of variable salinity, tidal range (inundation), anaerobic soils and intense sunlight. Plant biodiversity is generally low in a given mangal. The greatest biodiversity occurs in the mangal of New Guinea, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Adaptations to low oxygen.
Red mangroves, which can survive in the most inundated areas, prop themselves above the water level with stilt roots and can then absorb air through pores in their bark (lenticels). Black mangroves live on higher ground and make many pneumatophores (specialised root-like structures which stick up out of the soil like straws for breathing) which are also covered in lenticels.
These "breathing tubes" typically reach heights of up to 30 cm, and in some species, over 3 m. The four types of pneumatophores are stilt or prop type, snorkel or peg type, knee type, and ribbon or plank type. Knee and ribbon types may be combined with buttress roots at the base of the tree. The roots also contain wide aerenchyma to facilitate transport within the plants.
Limiting salt intake.
Red mangroves exclude salt by having significantly impermeable roots which are highly suberised (impregnated with suberin), acting as an ultra-filtration mechanism to exclude sodium salts from the rest of the plant. Analysis of water inside mangroves has shown 90% to 97% of salt has been excluded at the roots. In a frequently cited concept that has become known as the "sacrificial leaf", salt which does accumulate in the shoot (sprout) then concentrates in old leaves, which the plant then sheds. However, recent research suggests the older, yellowing leaves have no more measurable salt content than the other, greener leaves. Red mangroves can also store salt in cell vacuoles. As seen in the photograph on the right, white or grey mangroves can secrete salts directly; they have two salt glands at each leaf base (correlating with their name—they are covered in white salt crystals).
Limiting water loss.
Because of the limited fresh water available in salty intertidal soils, mangroves limit the amount of water they lose through their leaves. They can restrict the opening of their stomata (pores on the leaf surfaces, which exchange carbon dioxide gas and water vapour during photosynthesis). They also vary the orientation of their leaves to avoid the harsh midday sun and so reduce evaporation from the leaves. Anthony Calfo, a noted aquarium author, observed anecdotally a red mangrove in captivity only grows if its leaves are misted with fresh water several times a week, simulating frequent tropical rainstorms.
Nutrient uptake.
Because the soil is perpetually waterlogged, little free oxygen is available. Anaerobic bacteria liberate nitrogen gas, soluble ferrum (iron), inorganic phosphates, sulfides and methane, which make the soil much less nutritious. Pneumatophores (aerial roots) allow mangroves to absorb gases directly from the atmosphere, and other nutrients such as iron, from the inhospitable soil. Mangroves store gases directly inside the roots, processing them even when the roots are submerged during high tide.
Increasing survival of offspring.
In this harsh environment, mangroves have evolved a special mechanism to help their offspring survive. Mangrove seeds are buoyant and are therefore suited to water dispersal. Unlike most plants, whose seeds germinate in soil, many mangroves (e.g. red mangrove) are viviparous, whose seeds germinate while still attached to the parent tree. Once germinated, the seedling grows either within the fruit (e.g. "Aegialitis", "Avicennia" and "Aegiceras"), or out through the fruit (e.g. "Rhizophora", "Ceriops", "Bruguiera" and "Nypa") to form a propagule (a ready-to-go seedling) which can produce its own food via photosynthesis.
The mature propagule then drops into the water, which can transport it great distances. Propagules can survive desiccation and remain dormant for over a year before arriving in a suitable environment. Once a propagule is ready to root, its density changes so the elongated shape now floats vertically rather than horizontally. In this position, it is more likely to lodge in the mud and root. If it does not root, it can alter its density and drift again in search of more favorable conditions.
Taxonomy and evolution.
The following listing (modified from Tomlinson, 1986) gives the number of species of mangroves in each listed plant genus and family. Mangrove environments in the Eastern Hemisphere harbor six times as many species of trees and shrubs as do mangroves in the New World. Genetic divergence of mangrove lineages from terrestrial relatives, in combination with fossil evidence, suggests mangrove diversity is limited by evolutionary transition into the stressful marine environment, and the number of mangrove lineages has increased steadily over the Tertiary with little global extinction.
Geographical regions.
Mangroves can be found in over 118 countries and territories in the tropical and subtropical regions of the world. The largest percentage of mangroves is found between the 5° N and 5° S latitudes. Approximately 75% of world’s mangroves are found in just 15 countries. Asia has the largest amount (42%) of the world’s mangroves, followed by Africa (21%), North/Central America (15%), Oceania (12%) and South America (11%).
Africa.
There are important mangrove swamps in Kenya, Tanzania, République Démocratique du Congo (RDC) and Madagascar, with the latter even admixing at the coastal verge with dry deciduous forests.
Nigeria has Africa's largest mangrove concentration, spanning 36,000 km2. Oil spills and leaks have destroyed many in the last 50 years, damaging the local fishing economy and water quality.
Along the coast of the Red Sea, both on the Egyptian side and in the Gulf of Aqaba, mangroves composed primarily of "Avicennia marina" and "Rhizophora mucronata" grow in about 28 stands that cover about 525 hectares. Almost all Egyptian mangrove stands are now protected.
There are mangroves off the coast of Durban, South Africa, on the Umgeni River estuary.
Americas.
Mangroves live in many parts of the tropical and subtropical coastal zones of North and South America.
Continental United States.
Because of their sensitivity to subfreezing temperatures, mangroves in the continental United States are very limited to the Florida peninsula (see Florida mangroves) and some isolated growths of black mangrove ("Avicennia germinans") at the southmost coast of Louisiana and South Texas.
Mexico.
In Mexico four species of mangrove predominate: "Rhizophora mangle, Laguncularia racemosa, Avicennia germinans" and "Conocarpus erectus". During an inventory conducted by CONABIO between 2006 and 2008, 770,057 hectares of mangrove were counted. Of this total, 55% are located in the Yucatán Peninsula. 
Significant mangals include the Marismas Nacionales-San Blas mangroves found in Sinaloa and Nayarit.
Central America and Caribbean.
Mangroves occur on the Pacific and Caribbean coasts of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. Mangroves can also be found in many of the Antilles including Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Hispaniola, as well as other islands in the West Indies such as the Bahamas.
Belize.
The nation of Belize has the highest overall percentage of forest cover of any of the Central American countries. In terms of Belize's mangrove cover—which assumes the form not only of mangrove 'forest', but also of scrubs and savannas, among others—a 2010 satellite-based study of Belize's mangroves by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and the Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin America and the Caribbean found, in 2010, mangroves covered some 184,548 acres (74,684 hectares) or 3.4% of Belize's territory.
In 1980, by contrast, mangrove cover stood at 188,417 acres (76,250 hectares)—also 3.4% of Belize's territory, although based on the work of mangrove researcher Simon Zisman, Belize's mangrove cover in 1980 was estimated to represent 98.7% of the precolonial extent of those ecosystems. Belize's mangrove cover in 2010 was thus estimated to represent 96.7% of the precolonial cover. Assessing changes in Belize's mangrove cover over a 30-year period was possible because of Belize's participation in the Regional Visualization and Monitoring System, a regional observatory jointly implemented by CATHALAC, RCMRD, ICIMOD, NASA, USAID, and other partners.
South America.
Brazil contains approximately 26,000 km2 of mangals, 15% of the world's total.
Ecuador has substantial remaining mangrove forests in the provinces of El Oro, Guayas, Manabi and Esmeraldas with limited forest remaining in Santa Elena. The northern portion of Esmeraldas province has a large pristine mangrove forest that is preserved as the Reserva Ecológica Cayapas-Mataje (REMACAN) and is an original Ramsar site. This forest is the most preserved within Ecuador and likely the most pristine forest along the Pacific Coast of the Americas.
The only other major mangrove holding in Esmeraldas is in-and-around the community of Muisne and the Rio Muisne Estuary Swampland Wildlife Refuges. The mangroves in-and-around the estuaries of Muisne have decreased in area from 3222 ha in 1971 to 1065 ha as of 2005, during this time commercial shrimp aquaculture has become the dominant land-cover within this estuary environment.
On the border of Esmeraldas province and Manabí province is a formerly large area of mangrove within Cojimies Estuary. The mangroves in this estuary are some of the most degraded in Ecuador with only 19% of 1971 mangrove area remaining as of 1998, although mangrove has recovered since this date. Within Manabí the major mangrove holding estuary is the Chone estuary situated near the city of Bahía de Caráquez. Again, Chone has undergone substantial mangrove deforestation since the advent of commercial aquaculture in Ecuador. Although mangrove loss appears to have halted in this estuary and mangrove regrowth driven by local fisherman is now occurring.
Peru has a very small region of mangrove located in the north-west of the country on the Ecuadorian Border.
Venezuela's northern Caribbean island, Margarita, possesses mangrove forests in the Parque nacional Laguna de La Restinga. Venezuela has 4% of the world's mangroves, with an extension of 6735 km2.
Colombia possesses large mangrove forests on both its Caribbean and Pacific coasts.
The Mangrove forests of Suriname have a height of 20–25 m and are found mainly in the coastal area. There are six types of mangroves, namely two types of parwa or black mangroves, three types of red mangroves (mangro) and a small mangrove species (white mangrove, akira or tjila).
Asia.
Bangladesh.
The Sundarbans, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is the largest single block of tidal halophytic mangrove forest in the world, covering parts of Bangladesh's Khulna Division and the Indian state of West Bengal.
The Sundarbans National Park is a National Park, Tiger Reserve, and a Biosphere Reserve. It is one of the largest reserves for the Bengal tiger.
A third of this area is covered by water and marshes. Since 1966 it has been considered a sanctuary for wildlife with an estimated 400 Royal Bengal tigers and more than 30,000 deer.
The forest lies at the foot of the Ganges The seasonally-flooded Sundarbans freshwater swamp forests lie inland from the mangrove forests. The forest covers of which about are in Bangladesh. It was inscribed as a UNESCO world heritage site in 1997, but while the Bangladeshi and Indian portions constitute the same continuous ecotope, they are separately listed in the UNESCO world heritage list as the Sundarbans and Sundarbans National Park, respectively. The Sundarbans is intersected by a complex network of tidal waterways, mudflats and small islands of salt-tolerant mangrove forests. The area is known for the eponymous Royal Bengal Tiger (Panthera tigris tigris), as well as numerous fauna including species of birds, spotted deer, crocodiles and snakes. Sundarbans was designated a Ramsar site on May 21, 1992. The fertile soils of the delta have been subject to intensive human use for centuries, and the ecoregion has been mostly converted to intensive agriculture, with few enclaves of forest remaining. The remaining forests, together with the Sundarbans mangroves, are important habitat for the endangered tiger. Additionally, the Sundarbans serves a crucial function as a protective flood barrier for the millions of inhabitants in and around Kolkata (Calcutta) against the result of cyclone activity. 
Sundarbans is home to many different species of birds, mammals, insects, reptiles and fish. It is estimated that there may be found more than 120 species of fish and over 260 species of birds and more than fifty species of reptiles and eight amphibians. Many tourists go there to see the Bengal tigers, saltwater crocodiles, leopards and snakes cobra. 
Geographical data of Sundarban Latitude: 25.7667
Longitude: 88.7167
Average Height: 34
Time Zone: Asia / Dhaka
Title: Lugar Poblado
India.
The deltas of the Ganges, Mahanadi, Krishna, Godavari, and Kaveri rivers are known to contain mangrove forests.
The following table shows the presence of mangroves in the different states of India and the total area covered by them in square kilometres.
Sundarban Mangroves (India).
In the Ganga-Brahmaputra delta, Sundari trees are found, which provide durable hard timber. Palm, Coconut, keora, agar, also grow in some parts of the delta. India's mangrove forests are known to serve as a habitat for turtles, crocodiles, gharials, and snakes. This region is part of the Great Sundarbans, the largest mangroves region in the world and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This area covers a National Park, Tiger reserve and a Biosphere Reserve.
Bhitarkanika Mangroves.
Bhitarkanika Mangroves is India’s second largest forest, located in the state of Odisha. Bhitarkanika is created by the two river deltas of Brahmani and Baitarani river and one of the important Ramsar Wetland in India. It is also home of salt-water crocodiles and nesting beach olive ridley sea turtle.
Godavari-Krishna Mangroves.
The Godavari-Krishna mangroves lies in the delta of the Godavari and Krishna rivers in the state of Andhra Pradesh. Mangroves ecoregion is under protection for Calimere Wildlife and Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary.
Pichavaram Mangroves.
Pichavaram mangrove is one of the largest mangrove in India, situated at Pichavaram near Chidambaram in the state of Tamil Nadu. Pichavaram ranks amongs one of the most exquisite scenic spots in Tamil Nadu and home of many species of aquatic birds.
Baratang Island Mangroves.
Baratang Island Mangroves is a swamp, located at Great Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Mangrove Swamps of Baratang Island are situated between Middle and South Andamans, capital city Port Blair.
Indo-Malaya Ecozone.
Mangroves occur on Asia's south coast, throughout the Indian subcontinent, in all Southeast Asian countries, and on islands in the Indian Ocean, Persian gulf, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, South China Sea, East China Sea and the Pacific.
The mangal is particularly prevalent in the deltas of large Asian rivers. The Sundarbans is the largest mangrove forest in the world, located in the Ganges River delta in Bangladesh and West Bengal, India.
The Pichavaram mangroves in Tamil Nadu is India's one of the largest mangrove forests. The Bhitarkanika Mangroves Forest of Odisha, by the Bay of Bengal, is India's second largest mangrove forest. Other major mangals occur on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Gulf of Kutch in Gujarat.
Mangroves occur in certain muddy swampy islands of the Maldives.
On the Malayan Peninsula mangroves cover an estimated , while most of the remaining mangroves in Malaysia are on the island of Borneo.
In Vietnam, mangrove forests grow along the southern coast, including two forests: the Can Gio Mangrove Forest biosphere reserve and the U Minh mangrove forest in the sea and coastal region of Kiên Giang, Cà Mau and Bạc Liêu provinces.
The mangrove forests of Kompong Sammaki in Cambodia are of major ecological and cultural importance, as the human population relies heavily on the crabs and fish that live in the roots.
The three most important mangrove forests of Taiwan are: Tamsui River in Taipei, Jhonggang River in Miaoli and the Sihcao Wetlands in Tainan. According to research, four types of mangrove exist in Taiwan. Some places have been developed as scenic areas, such as the log raft routes in Sihcao.
The most extensive mangrove forests of the Ryukyu Islands in East China Sea occur on Iriomote Island of the Yaeyama Islands, Okinawa, Japan. Seven types of mangroves are recognised on Iriomote Island.
The northern limit of mangrove forests in the Indo-Malaya ecozone is considered to be Tanegashima Island, Kyushu, Japan.
Indonesia.
In the Indonesian Archipelago, mangroves occur around much of Sumatra, Borneo, Sulawesi, and the surrounding islands, while further north, they are found along the coast of the Malay Peninsula. Indonesia has around 9.36 million hectares of mangrove forests, but 48% is categorized as 'moderately damaged' and 23% as 'badly damaged'.
Mangroves around the world.
Pakistan.
Pakistani mangroves are located mainly along the delta of the Indus River (the Indus River Delta-Arabian Sea mangroves ecoregion). Major mangrove forests are found on the coastline of the provinces of Sindh and Balochistan.
In Karachi, land reclamation projects have led to the cutting down of mangrove forests for commercial and urban development.. On 22 June 2013, Sindh Forest Department, Govt. of Sindh, Pakistan, with the help of 300 local coastal volunteer planters set the Guinness World through 847,250 mangrove saplings planted at Kharo Chan, Thatta, Sindh, Pakistan in a little over 12 hours. This is the highest number of saplings planted within a day under the Guinness World Record category of ""Maximum Number of Trees Planted in a Day"”.. 
Sindh Forest Department, Government of Sindh Mangrove has played pioneer role for the conservation and protection of the mangroves in the Indus Delta since late 1950s when it was handed over the areas. A breakthrough success is the Re-introduction of Rhizophora mucronata into the Indus Delta, which had become extinct there. More recently, a threatened mangrove shrub Ceriops tagal has also been successfully Re-introduces. A third species, Aegiceras corniculatum, is under trails at the nursery stage. 
A gigantic initiative is under in the Sindh, Pakistan, to rehabilitate the degraded and blank mangrove mudflats. Since 2010 alone, around 55,000 Hectares of such area has been planted and rehabilitated. During this period, through concerted efforts and a rigorous conservation policy adopted by the Sindh Forest Department, Govt. of Sindh and the federal govt. a mangrove resource base of 150,000 plus Hectares has been created, with the support of local coastal communities. International organizations like IUCN and WWF are also playing critical role to support this initiative of the government. Other achievements include: (1) Declaring all the mangrove forests in the Indus Delta as Protected Forests in December 2010; Constitution of a Mangrove Conservation Committee at the provincial level which includes all stakeholders as members and overall awareness of the importance of mangroves and its ecosystem. 
Middle East.
Oman, near Muscat, supports large areas of mangroves, in particular at Shinas, Qurm Park and Mahout Island. In Arabic, mangrove trees are known as "qurm", thus the mangrove area in Oman is known as Qurm Park. A small mangrove area is present in the Kingdom of Bahrain. Mangroves are also present extensively in neighbouring Yemen.
Iranian mangrove forests occur between 25°11′N to 27°52′N. These forests exist in the north part of the Persian Gulf and Sea of Oman, along three maritime provinces in the south of Iran. These provinces, respectively, from southwest to southeast of Iran, include Bushehr, Hormozgan, and Sistan and Balouchestan.
Mangrove is also widely seen in Tarut Island, east of Qatif in Saudi Arabia. In addition, large forest of mangrove surround the coast to the south of Qatif (Siahat Beach). Nonetheless, because of sea land re-claiming the mangrove is being cut down which makes lots of sea fish losses their natural habitats.
The mangrove forests that cover thousands of hectares of land along the UAE shoreline form an integral part of its coastal ecosystem. The Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi (EAD) is currently working on rehabilitation, conservation and protection of mangrove forests in seven key sites in Abu Dhabi including: Saadiyat Island, Jubail Island, Marawah Marine Biosphere Reserve (which also comprises famous Bu Tinah Island), Bu Syayeef Protected Area, Ras Gharab, the Eastern Corniche and Ras Ghanada.
Oceania.
Australia and New Guinea.
More than 5 species of Rhizophoraceae grow in Australasia with particularly high biodiversity on the island of New Guinea and northern Australia.
Australia has about 11,500 km2 of mangroves, primarily on the northern and eastern coasts of the continent, with occurrences as far south as Millers Landing in Wilsons Promontory, Victoria (38°54′S) and Barker Inlet in Adelaide, South Australia.
New Zealand.
New Zealand also has mangrove forests extending to around 38°S (similar to Australia's southernmost mangrove incidence): the furthest geographical extent on the west coast is Raglan Harbour (37°48′S); on the east coast, Ohiwa Harbour (near Opotiki) is the furthest south mangroves are found (38°00′S).
Pacific islands.
Twenty-five species of mangrove are found on various Pacific islands, with extensive mangals on some islands. Mangals on Guam, Palau, Kosrae and Yap have been badly affected by development.
Mangroves are not native to Hawaii, but the red mangrove, "Rhizophora mangle", and Oriental mangrove, "Bruguiera sexangula", have been introduced and are now naturalized. Both species are considered invasive species and classified as pests by the University of Hawaii Botany Department.
Exploitation and conservation.
Adequate data is only available for about half of the global area of Mangrove swamp. However, of those areas for which data has been collected, it appears that 35% of the Mangroves have been destroyed. The United Nations Environment Program & Hamilton (2013), estimate that shrimp farming causes approximately a quarter of the destruction of mangrove forests. Likewise, the 2010 update of the World Mangrove Atlas indicated a fifth of the world's mangrove ecosystems have been lost since 1980.
Grassroots efforts to save mangroves from development are becoming more popular as their benefits become more widely known. In the Bahamas, for example, active efforts to save mangroves are occurring on the islands of Bimini and Great Guana Cay. In Trinidad and Tobago as well, efforts are underway to protect a mangrove threatened by the construction of a steelmill and a port. In Thailand, community management has been effective in restoring damaged mangroves. Within northern Ecuador mangrove regrowth is reported in almost all estuaries and stems primarily from local actors responding to earlier periods of deforestation in the Esmeraldas region.
Mangroves have been reported to be able to help buffer against tsunami, cyclones, and other storms. One village in Tamil Nadu was protected from tsunami destruction—the villagers in Naluvedapathy planted 80,244 saplings to get into the Guinness Book of World Records. This created a kilometre-wide belt of trees of various varieties. When the tsunami struck, much of the land around the village was flooded, but the village itself suffered minimal damage.
Reforestation.
In some areas, mangrove reforestation and mangrove restoration is also underway. Red mangroves are the most common choice for cultivation, used particularly in marine aquariums in a sump to reduce nitrates and other nutrients in the water. Mangroves also appear in home aquariums, and as ornamental plants, such as in Japan.
In Senegal, Haïdar El Ali has started the project, which (amongst others) focuses on reforesting several areas with mangroves.
The Manzanar Mangrove Initiative is an ongoing experiment in Arkiko, Eritrea, part of the Manzanar Project founded by Gordon H. Sato, establishing new mangrove plantations on the coastal mudflats. Initial plantings failed, but observation of the areas where mangroves did survive by themselves led to the conclusion that nutrients in water flow from inland were important to the health of the mangroves. Trials with the Eritrean Ministry of Fisheries followed, and a planting system was designed to provide the nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron missing from seawater.
The propagules are planted inside a reused galvanized steel can with the bottom knocked out; a small piece of iron and a pierced plastic bag with fertilizer containing nitrogen and phosphorus are buried with the propagule. , after six years of planting, 700,000 mangroves are growing; providing stock feed for sheep and habitat for oysters, crabs, other bivalves, and fish.
National studies.
In terms of local and national studies of mangrove loss, the case of Belize's mangroves is illustrative in its contrast to the global picture. A recent, satellite-based study—funded by the World Wildlife Fund and conducted by the Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin America and the Caribbean (CATHALAC)—indicates Belize's mangrove cover declined by a mere 2% over a 30-year period. The study was born out of the need to verify the popular conception that mangrove clearing in Belize was rampant.
Instead, the assessment showed, between 1980 and 2010, under of mangroves had been cleared, although clearing of mangroves near Belize's main coastal settlements (e.g. Belize City and San Pedro) was relatively high. The rate of loss of Belize's mangroves—at 0.07% per year between 1980 and 2010—was much lower than Belize's overall rate of forest clearing (0.6% per year in the same period). These findings can also be interpreted to indicate Belize's mangrove regulations (under the nation's) have largely been effective. Nevertheless, the need to protect Belize's mangroves is imperative, as a 2009 study by the World Resources Institute (WRI) indicates the ecosystems contribute US$174–249 million per year to Belize's national economy.
Notes.
Indonesia Center for Environmental Law (IECL), was founded in 1993 by Mas Achmad Santosa, Mochamad Zaidun, Sandra Moniaga, Benny K. Harman, and Wahyuni Baha. The main goal of the organization is to defend public interest regarding the peoples right to the resources of the environment. The organization was developed during a period where the government was high economic development within Indonesia was very much oriented to

</doc>
<doc id="73451" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73451" title="El Norte (film)">
El Norte (film)

El Norte is a 1983 British-American low-budget independent drama film, directed by Gregory Nava. The screenplay was written by Gregory Nava and Anna Thomas, based on Nava's story. The movie was first presented at the Telluride Film Festival in 1983, and its wide release was in January 1984.
The picture was partly funded by the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), a non-profit public broadcasting television service in the United States.
"El Norte" received an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay in 1985, the first American independent film to be so honored. In 1995, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
The drama features Zaide Silvia Gutiérrez and David Villalpando, in their first film roles, as two indigenous youths who flee Guatemala in the early 1980s due to the ethnic and political persecution of the Guatemalan Civil War. Through Mexico to the United States, arriving in Los Angeles, California,
Plot.
The writing team of Nava and Thomas split the story into three parts:
Arturo Xuncax: The first part takes place in a small rural Guatemalan village called San Pedro and introduces the Xuncax family, a group of indigenous Mayans. Arturo is a coffee picker and his wife a homemaker. Arturo explains to his son, Enrique, his world view and how the "indio" fares in Guatemalan life, noting that, "to the rich, the peasant is just a pair of strong arms". Arturo and his family then discuss the possibility of going to the United States where "all the people, even the poor, own their own cars". Because of his attempts to form a labor union among the workers, Arturo and the other organizers are attacked and murdered by government troops when a co-worker is bribed to betray them—Arturo's severed head is seen hanging from a tree. When Enrique attempts to climb the tree that displays his father's head, a soldier attacks him. Enrique fights and kills the attacker, only to learn that many of their fellow villagers have been rounded up by soldiers. The children's mother too "disappears": abducted by soldiers. So, using money given to them by their godmother, Enrique and his sister Rosa decide to flee Guatemala, the land of their birth, and head north.
Coyote: During the second part of the film the two teenagers flee Guatemala, travel through Mexico, and meet a Mexican coyote who guides them across the border. This section includes various comic scenes relating to mutual stereotyping among different ethnic groups; the two attempt to pass themselves off as indigenous Mexicans, failing to convince one Mexican truck driver after naming the wrong destination, but later succeeding in convincing a U.S. Border Patrol officer by copiously peppering their responses with the Mexican word for "fuck", which a neighbor had suggested was how all Mexicans speak. After their first failed attempt to cross the ""frontera"", where a man posing as a coyote deceives and attempts to rob them, they have a horrific experience when they finally cross the U.S.-Mexican border through a sewer pipe laden with rats; critic Roger Ebert noted:
El Norte: In the final part of the film Rosa and Enrique discover the difficulties of living in the U.S. without official documentation. The brother and sister team find work and a place to live and initially feel good about their decision. However, Rosa nearly is caught up in an immigration raid and must find a new job. Working as a domestic, she is puzzled when her Anglo employer shows her a washing machine. Enrique becomes a busboy and, as his English classes begin to improve his command of the language, he is promoted to a position as a waiter's assistant. He is later approached by a businesswoman who has a better-paying job for him in Chicago as a foreman, which he initially declines; he too encounters problems when a jealous Chicano co-worker reports him to immigration, causing him to flee the restaurant and seek out the businesswoman.
When Enrique finally decides to take the position, Rosa becomes gravely ill with typhus contracted from the rat bites she received during their border crossing. When this happens, Enrique must make the tough decision of missing the flight to Chicago to be by her side, and thus loses the position. As Enrique visits the hospital, Rosa laments that she will not live to enjoy the fruits of their harrowing journey to the U.S. Rosa sums up the film's major theme when she says to Enrique:
Although Enrique is temporarily employed once again, he is distracted by haunting daydreams about his sister's lost desires for a better life. The final shot in the film again shows a severed head hanging from a rope, which may be the same image used in Part I of the film; one critic has commented that a hanging, severed head is "a symbolic device used in some Latin films to signify that the character has committed suicide".
Background.
The origins of "El Norte" are the director's experiences in San Diego, California, as he grew up. Nava came from a border family and has relatives on the other side in Tijuana, Baja California. As a youth, he crossed the border several times a week, often wondering who lived in all those cardboard shacks on the Mexican side.
For research the producers of "El Norte" learned about the plight of indigenous Guatemalans from years of research, much of it conducted among exiles living in Southern California. According to Nava, "There are hundreds of thousands of refugees from Central America in Los Angeles alone. Nobody knows the exact number, but a recent television inquiry estimated 300,000-400,000. In our own research, we came across a community of Mayans from Guatemala—5,000 from one village—now in Los Angeles. The original village, which is now dead, had 15,000."
Annette Insdorf, writing for "The New York Times," said Nava discussed the singular nature of the US-Mexico border. Nava said: "The border is unique—the only place in the world where an industrialized first-world nation shares the border with a third-world country. In California, it's just a fence: on one side are the Tijuana slums, on the other side—San Diego. It's so graphic! This was the germ of the story."
The motion picture has become a staple of high school Spanish language classes throughout the United States and multiculturalism studies in college.
Financing.
Nava and Anna Thomas spent two years raising money for "El Norte" but they consciously did not pursue film studios or television networks because, more than likely, studio executives would demand changes be made in either script, casting, or both. Gregory Nava and Thomas believe that much of what makes "El Norte" special would have been jeopardized if a major studio had been involved in the filmmaking process.
Financing for the film was provided by PBS's American Playhouse (50%) and the rest in pre-sales. One such pre-sale was made to the United Kingdom's Channel 4 (a public-service television broadcaster).
Themes.
Magical realism.
Parts of "El Norte" provide an example of how Latin American magical realism, primarily found in novels, has been depicted in a theatrical film. "The Washington Post" writer Ann Hornaday said: "El Norte" was seminal, both for its graceful blend of classical narrative and magic realism, and the power with which it brought an otherwise invisible world to life.”
Indigenous view and bigotry.
"El Norte" portrays an Amerindian point-of-view and this is exemplified by the religion they follow. An example is when Rosa Xuncax sings the eulogy at the funeral of her father and its Native American Maya religious theme. A traditional Maya belief is that life has a cyclical nature. Rosa sings in her Maya tongue:
Throughout "El Norte" young Rosa and Enrique and their family are subjected to many epithets, hatred, and bigotry due to their indigenous heritage. When the father Arturo inadvertently kills a soldier, for example, a ladino screams: 
And, when Rosa and Enrique reach their destination in Mexico, a passenger screams at the timid Maya youngsters:
Guatemalan exodus.
David Villalpando, the actor who played Enrique Xuncax, gave an interview to "Lear Media" about what the film meant to him and why he believes the film is important. Villalpando said:
Production.
When Nava and his production crew were, more or less, kicked out of Mexico during the film shoot, he had to re-create a Mexican village in California. Nava said: "We were filming in Mexico during the end of the López Portillo presidency, one of the last of the old-fashioned caciques to rule Mexico. One day, men with machine guns took over the set. I had guns pointed at my head. We were forced to shut down production, bribe our way out of the country, fight to get our costumes back, and start shooting again in California. Ironically, in the United States our extras were real Mayan refugees. They were the people the movie was about."
Nava tells the story that, at one point, Mexican police kidnapped their accountant and held him for ransom, while, at the same time, his parents had to pose as tourists in order to smuggle exposed film out of the country in their suitcases.
Filming locations.
The film was shot in Mexico and California. In Mexico: Chiapas, Morelos, México, D.F., and Tijuana. In California: San Diego and Los Angeles.
Distribution.
The film was released in Scotland on October 11, 1983. On December 11, 1983, the movie opened in New York City and on January 27, 1984, it opened in wide release.
It was screened in the "" section at the 1984 Cannes Film Festival.
A director's cut was re-released in May 2000.
Reception.
Critical response.
When released, the staff at "Variety" magazine described the film as the "first United American independent epic".
In his review, film critic Roger Ebert was pleased with Nava and Thomas's work and likened it to a classic film of yesteryear, writing: "El Norte" (1983) tells their story with astonishing visual beauty, with unashamed melodrama, with anger leavened by hope. It is a "Grapes of Wrath" for our time."
In a scene where the characters cross into California by means of a rat-infested sewer tunnel and emerge to a view of San Diego, "Commonweal" critic Tom O'Brien wrote: "... the scene sums up its rare strength".
Film critics Frederic and Mary Ann Brussat of the website "Spirituality and Practice" were touched by Nava and Thomas' story and the attention they give to the character's native roots, and wrote: "Nava's attention to details, particularly the aesthetic and religious beauty of Indian culture, and his sympathy for the protagonists' inner lives lift this story above its melodramatic moments and make the tale a memorable one."
Yet, some film reviewers objected to what they considered the film's overly sad end.
Vincent Canby, writing for "The New York Times", wrote: "Until its arbitrarily tragic ending, "El Norte" seems about to make one of the most boldly original and satirical social-political statements ever to be found in a film about the United States as a land of power as well as opportunity." However, Canby did find the acting top-rate and noted the realism they bring to their tasks. He added: "Mr. Nava does not patronize his 'little people.' This has something to do with the straight, unactorly quality of the performances, especially by Zaide Silvia Gutierrez as Rosa and David Villalpando as Enrique, two splendid Mexican actors."
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 80% of critics gave the film a positive review, based on ten reviews.
Accolades.
Wins
Nominations
Other distinguishments
Soundtrack.
A soundtrack for the film was produced in France by Island/Phono-Gram. The album was produced by Gregory Nava and Danny Holloway. The CD features original music for the film by Los Folkloristas, Emil Richards, and Linda O'Brian.
It also features "Rosa's Song" sung by the actress Zaide Silvia Gutiérrez. Adagio for Strings, by the American composer Samuel Barber, was featured at two different points in the film. It also contains the First Cello Concerto and De Natura Sonoris No. 1 by Krzysztof Penderecki, the latter of which is used twice.
Home media.
The film has been released in video on two separate occasions, with different video covers.
In DVD format it has been released in: region 2 on June 15, 2002; region 4; and region 1.
The Criterion Collection released "El Norte" in DVD and Blu-ray format in January 2009.

</doc>
<doc id="73452" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73452" title="The Emperor Jones">
The Emperor Jones

The Emperor Jones is a 1920 play by American dramatist Eugene O'Neill that tells the tale of Brutus Jones, a resourceful, self-assured African-American and a former Pullman porter, who kills another black man in a dice game, is jailed, and later escapes to a small, backward Caribbean island where he sets himself up as emperor. The play recounts his story in flashbacks as Brutus makes his way through the jungle in an attempt to escape former subjects who have rebelled against him.
The play is one of O'Neil's major experimental works, mixing expressionism and realism, and the use of an unreliable narrator and multiple points of view. It was also an oblique commentary on the U.S. occupation of Haiti after bloody rebellions there, an act of imperialism that was much condemned in O'Neill's radical political circles in New York. "The Emperor Jones" draws on O'Neill's own hallucinatory experience hacking through the jungle while prospecting for gold in Honduras in 1909. 
It was O'Neill's first big box-office hit, and the one that established him as a successful playwright, after he won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for his first play, also in 1920, the much less well-known "Beyond the Horizon". "The Emperor Jones" was included in Burns Mantle's "The Best Plays of 1920-1921". 
Summary.
The play is virtually a monologue for its leading character, Jones, in a Shakespearean range from regal power to the depths of terror and insanity, comparable to Lear or Macbeth. Scenes 2 to 7 are from the point of view of Jones, and no other character speaks. The first and last scenes are essentially a framing device with a character named Smithers, a white trader who appears to be part of illegal activities. In the first scene, Smithers is told about the rebellion by an old woman, and then has a lengthy conversation with Jones. In the last scene, Smithers converses with Lem, the leader of the rebellion. Smithers has mixed feelings about Jones, though he generally has more respect for Jones than for the rebels. During the final scene, Jones is killed by a silver bullet, which was the only way that the rebels believed Jones could be killed, and the way in which Jones planned to kill himself if he was captured.
Productions.
1920 premiere.
"The Emperor Jones" was first staged on November 1, 1920, by the Provincetown Players at the Playwright's Theater in New York City. Charles Sidney Gilpin, a respected leading man from the all-black Lafayette Players of Harlem, was the first actor to play the role of Brutus Jones on stage. They did have some conflict over Gilpin's tendency to change O'Neill's use of the word "nigger" to Negro and colored in the course of the play. This production was O'Neill's first real smash hit. The Players' small theater was too small to cope with audience demand for tickets, and the play was transferred to another theater. It ran for 204 performances and was hugely popular, and toured in the States with this cast for the next two years.
1924 revival.
Although Gilpin continued to perform the role of Brutus Jones in the U.S. tour that followed the Broadway closing of the play, he eventually had a falling out with O'Neill. Gilpin wanted O'Neill to remove the word "nigger", which occurred frequently in the play, but the playwright felt its use was consistent with his dramatic intentions and the use of language was, in fact, based on a friend, an African-American tavern-keeper on the New London waterfront that was O'Neill's favorite drinking spot in his home town. When they could not come to a reconciliation, O'Neill replaced the middle-aged Gilpin with the much younger and then unknown Paul Robeson, who had only performed on the concert stage. Robeson starred in the title role in the New York revival and in the London production. He received excellent reviews and, coupled with his performance in the 1928 London production of the musical "Show Boat", went on to worldwide fame as one of the great black artists of the 20th century, while Gilpin faded into obscurity.
1926 revival.
The show was again revived in 1926 at the Mayfair Theatre in Manhattan, with Gilpin again starring as Jones and also directing the show. The production, which ran for 61 performances, is remembered today for the acting debut of a young Moss Hart as Smithers.
Federal Theatre Project.
The Federal Theatre Project of the Works Progress Administration launched several productions of the play in cities across the United States, including a production with marionettes in Los Angeles in 1938.
Recent productions.
The Wooster Group mounted a production of the play in 2007 for the Philadelphia LiveArts Festival, which played to sold-out audiences every night of its run. Along with its post-dramatic aesthetics, this staging was notable in that the actor playing the part of Jones, Kate Valk, was female, white, and performed in blackface — which had, ironically, been a suggestion for the original play, which O'Neill had vetoed. 
The play ran for 33 performances at The National Theatre, directed by Thea Sharrock and starring Paterson Joseph in the lead.
New York's Irish Repertory Theatre staged a 2009 revival, which received overwhelmingly positive reviews. John Douglas Thompson portrayed Jones.
Film, opera and ballet adaptations.
The play was adapted for a 1933 feature film starring Paul Robeson and directed by Dudley Murphy, an avant-garde filmmaker of O'Neill's Greenwich Village circle who pursued the reluctant playwright for a decade before getting the rights from him. 
Louis Gruenberg wrote an opera based on the play, which was premiered at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City in 1933. Baritone Lawrence Tibbett sang the title role, performing in blackface. Paul Robeson's 1936 film "Song of Freedom" features a scene from the opera with Robeson singing the role of Jones. This has sometimes resulted in a confusion that the 1933 film of O'Neill's play is a film of the opera.
In the UK, BBC Television produced an adaptation in 1938, starring Robert Adams, and another in 1953, starring Gordon Heath. 
Several revivals were made in the 1950s when Robeson himself was blacklisted, denied his passport by the State Department and his films — including the 1933 film — recordings and performances were banned in the United States; these new productions were implicitly in defiance of the persecution and suppression of this great star by McCarthyism and the FBI from 1950 until 1958, and part of a world-wide effort of artists to lift the ban. 
First, the legendary New York actor Ossie Davis starred in a television adaptation for the "Kraft Television Theatre" in 1955 — this at a time when black faces were rarely seen on American television sets. 
In 1956 Heitor Villa-Lobos wrote a ballet based on the play that was commissioned by The Empire Music Festival of New York, and danced by José Limón's company — Limon himself a revered teacher at Juilliard and breakthrough performer of color. 
A live British television production by Associated Television for the first season of its "Armchair Theatre" series was seen on UK television on March 30, 1958. It features African-American actor Kenneth Spencer, and was directed by the Canadian director Ted Kotcheff and adapted by the American "beat" novelist Terry Southern in his first screenwriting job. 
An experimental video by Christopher Kondek and Elizabeth LeCompte showcases the production of the play by the New York-based performance troupe The Wooster Group, starring Kate Valk and Willem Dafoe.

</doc>
<doc id="73453" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73453" title="Cinderella">
Cinderella

Cinderella, or The Little Glass Slipper, (, , ) is a folk tale embodying a myth-element of unjust oppression/triumphant reward. Thousands of variants are known throughout the world. The title character is a young woman living in unfortunate circumstances, that are suddenly changed to remarkable fortune. The oldest documented version comes from China, and the oldest European version from Italy. The most popular version was first published by Charles Perrault in "Histoires ou contes du temps passé" in 1697, and later by the Brothers Grimm in their folk tale collection "Grimms' Fairy Tales".
Although the story's title and main character's name change in different languages, in English-language folklore "Cinderella" is the archetypal name. The word "Cinderella" has, by analogy, come to mean one whose attributes were unrecognized, or one who unexpectedly achieves recognition or success after a period of obscurity and neglect. The still-popular story of "Cinderella" continues to influence popular culture internationally, lending plot elements, allusions, and tropes to a wide variety of media.
The Aarne–Thompson system classifies Cinderella as "the persecuted heroine". The story of Rhodopis, about a Greek slave girl who marries the king of Egypt, is considered the earliest known variant of the "Cinderella" story (published 7 BC), and many variants are known throughout the world.
Ancient and international versions.
China.
Another version of the story, "Ye Xian", appeared in "Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang" by Duan Chengshi around 860. Here, the hardworking and lovely girl befriends a fish, the reincarnation of her mother, who was killed by her stepmother and sister. Ye Xian saves the bones, which are magic, and they help her dress appropriately for the New Year Festival. When she loses her slipper after being recognized by her stepfamily, the king finds her slipper and falls in love with her (eventually rescuing her from her cruel stepmother).
Indonesia and Malaysia.
The Indonesian and Malaysian story "Bawang Merah Bawang Putih," are about two girls named Bawang Putih (literally "White Onion", meaning "garlic") and Bawang Merah ("Red Onion"). While the two country's respective versions differ in the exact relationship of the girls and the identity of the protagonist, they have highly similar plot elements. Both have a magical fish as the "fairy godmother" to her daughter, which the antagonist cooks. The heroine then finds the bones and buries them, and over the grave a magical swing appears. The protagonist sits on the swing and sings to make it sway, her song reaching the ears of a passing Prince. The swing is akin to the slipper test, which distinguishes the heroine from her evil sister, and the Prince weds her in the end.
In Indonesia, Bawang Putih is the kind-hearted girl, who suffers at the hands of her evil stepmother and stepsister, Bawang Merah, who is the one that cooks the fish-mother. When the Prince enquires after the singer on the swing, Bawang Merah lies, but is proven false when cannot make the magical swing move. The angry prince forces Bawang Merah and her mother to tell the truth. They then admit that there is another daughter in the house. Bawang Putih comes out and moves the magical swing by her singing. In the end, she and her prince marry and live happily ever after.
In the Malaysian version, it is Bawang Merah and her mother Mak Labu ("Mother Gourd") who are good, while her half sister Bawang Putih and her mother Mak Kundur ("Mother Wintermelon") are evil. Both mothers were the wives of a poor man, and upon his death Mak Kundur seized control of the household and forced Mak Labu and Bawang Merah to do all the chores around the house. One day as Mak Labu was fetching water at the well, Mak Kundur pushed her into it, and Mak Labu turns into a gourami. In this version, Mak Kundur killed the fish and fed it to Bawang Merah who learns of her mother's fishbones in a dream and finds them with the aid of some ants. Bawang Merah gathers the fish bones and buries them in a small grave underneath a tree. When she visits the grave the next day, she is surprised to see that a beautiful swing has appeared from one of the tree's branches. When Bawang Merah sits in the swing and sings an old lullaby, it magically swings back and forth. In this version, Mak Kundur knows the Prince, and lies when a royal guard enquires after the girl on the swing. Bawang Merah sings and it is she whom the Prince marries at the end of the story.
Philippines.
Another version similar to the Chinese, Malay, and Middle Eastern versions, also exists in the Philippines, known as "Mariang Alimango" ("Mary the Crab"). María is ill-treated by her wicked stepmother and stepsisters, and she is aided by the spirit of her dead mother that reincarnates as a crab, hence the title. The stepmother discovers the crab and after cooking and eating it, María buries the shell and remains, and her mother's spirit again returns to serve as her "fairy godmother". The slipper-test is also present, and María wins the heart of the prince during his coming-of-age celebration.
Vietnam.
In the Vietnamese version "Tam Cam", Tam is mistreated by both her father's co-wife and half-sister, who stole her birthright by winning a wager of fishing unjustly proposed by the stepmother. The only fish that was left to her was killed and eaten by her step-family, but its bones served as her protector and guardian, eventually leading her to be the king's bride during a festival. The protagonist however, turns into the antagonist in part two of the story, by boiling her stepsister alive and then fooling her stepmother into cannibalism by feeding her her own daughter's flesh.
Korea.
There is a Korean version named "Kongjwi and Patjwi". It deals a story about a kind girl Kongjwi who was constantly abused by her stepmother and stepsister Patjwi. The step-family forces Kongjwi to stay at home while they attend the king's festival, by asking her to repair a leaking jar. A toad assists with the jar, and an ox brings her clothes for the festival. The motif is same, concerning also a king falling in love with her. But some minor details have changed because this fictional story is taking place in Korea. That includes the slipper's details and the usual festivals that happen in the Cinderella stories.
West and South Asia.
Several different variants of the story appear in the medieval "One Thousand and One Nights", also known as the "Arabian Nights", including "The Second Shaykh's Story", "The Eldest Lady's Tale" and "Abdallah ibn Fadil and His Brothers", all dealing with the theme of a younger sibling harassed by two jealous elders. In some of these, the siblings are female, while in others, they are male. One of the tales, "Judar and His Brethren", departs from the happy endings of previous variants and reworks the plot to give it a tragic ending instead, with the younger brother being poisoned by his elder brothers.
Britain.
Aspects of Cinderella may be derived from the story of Cordelia in Geoffrey of Monmouth's "Historia Regum Britanniae". Cordelia is the youngest and most virtuous of King Leir of Britain's three daughters, however her virtue is such that it will not allow her to lie in flattering her father when he asks, so that he divides up the kingdom between the elder daughters and leaves Cordelia with nothing. Cordelia marries her love, Aganippus, King of the Franks, and flees to Gaul where she and her husband raise an army and depose her wicked sisters who have been misusing their father. Cordelia is finally crowned Queen of Britain. However her reign only lasts five years. The story is famously retold in Shakespeare's "King Lear", but given a tragic ending.
Early written versions.
The first written European version of the story was published in Napoli (Naples) by Giambattista Basile, in his "Pentamerone" (1634). The story itself was based in the Kingdom of Naples, at that time the most important political and cultural center of Southern Italy and among the most influential capitals in Europe, and written in the Neapolitan dialect. It was later retold, along with other Basile tales, by Charles Perrault in "Histoires ou contes du temps passé" (1697), and by the Brothers Grimm in their folk tale collection "Grimms' Fairy Tales" (1812).
The name "Cenerentola" comes from the Italian word "cenere" – tchenere (ash – cinder). It has to do with the fact that servants and scullions were usually soiled with ash at that time, because of their cleaning work and also because they had to live in cold basements so they usually tried to get warm by sitting close to the fireplace.
Plot.
"Cenerentola", by Basile.
Giambattista Basile, a Neapolitan soldier and government official, assembled a set of oral folk tales into a written collection titled "Lo cunto de li cunti" (The Story of Stories), or "Pentamerone". It included the tale of Cenerentola, which features a wicked stepmother and evil stepsisters, magical transformations, a missing slipper, and a hunt by a monarch for the owner of the slipper. It was published posthumously in 1634.
Plot:
"Cendrillon", by Perrault.
One of the most popular versions of Cinderella was written in French by Charles Perrault in 1697, under the name "Cendrillon". The popularity of his tale was due to his additions to the story, including the pumpkin, the fairy-godmother and the introduction of "glass" (a translation error must have occurred when the story was translated from French into English, as it is argued that in the earliest printed French version it was a "pantoufle de vair", which is the old name for grey squirrel fur and not a "pantoufle de verre" which would be glass) slippers.
Plot:
The first moral of the story is that beauty is a treasure, but graciousness is priceless. Without it, nothing is possible; with it, one can do anything.
However, the second moral of the story mitigates the first one and reveals the criticism that Perrault is aiming at: That "without doubt it is a great advantage to have intelligence, courage, good breeding, and common sense. These, and similar talents come only from heaven, and it is good to have them. However, even these may fail to bring you success, without the blessing of a godfather or a godmother."
"Aschenputtel", by the Brothers Grimm.
Another well-known version was recorded by the German brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century. The tale is called ""Aschenputtel"" (""Cinderella"" in English translations). This version is much more intense than that of Perrault and Disney, in that Cinderella's father did not die and the step sisters cut off their own toes to fit in the golden slipper. In addition, there is no fairy godmother, but rather help comes from a wishing tree that she planted on her mother's grave.
Plot:
Aschenputtel's relationship with her father in this version is ambiguous; Perrault's version states that the absent father is dominated by his second wife, explaining why he does not prevent the abuse of his daughter. However, the father in this tale plays an active role in several scenes, and it is not explained why he tolerates the mistreatment of his child. He also describes Aschenputtel as his "first wife's child" and not his own.
Plot variations and alternative tellings.
Villains: In some versions, her father plays an active role in the humiliation of his daughter; in others, he is secondary to his new wife; in some versions, especially the popular Disney film, the father has died.
Although many variants of Cinderella feature the wicked stepmother, the defining trait of type 510A is a female persecutor: in "Fair, Brown and Trembling" and "Finette Cendron", the stepmother does not appear at all, and it is the older sisters who confine her to the kitchen. In other fairy tales featuring the ball, she was driven from home by the persecutions of her father, usually because he wished to marry her. Of this type (510B) are "Cap O' Rushes", "Catskin", All-Kinds-of-Fur, and "Allerleirauh", and she slaves in the kitchen because she found a job there. In "Katie Woodencloak", the stepmother drives her from home, and she likewise finds such a job.
In "La Cenerentola", Gioachino Rossini inverted the sex roles: Cenerentola is oppressed by her stepfather. (This makes the opera Aarne-Thompson type 510B.) He also made the economic basis for such hostility unusually clear, in that Don Magnifico wishes to make his own daughters' dowries larger, to attract a grander match, which is impossible if he must provide a third dowry. Folklorists often interpret the hostility between the stepmother and stepdaughter as just such a competition for resources, but seldom does the tale make it clear.
Ball, Ballgown, and Curfew: The number of balls varies, sometimes one, sometimes two, and sometimes three. The fairy godmother is Perrault's own addition to the tale. The person who aided Cinderella (Aschenputtel) in the Grimms's version is her dead mother. Aschenputtel requests her aid by praying at her grave, on which a tree is growing. Helpful doves roosting in the tree shake down the clothing she needs for the ball. This motif is found in other variants of the tale as well, such as "The Cinder Maid", collected by Joseph Jacobs, and the Finnish "The Wonderful Birch". Playwright James Lapine incorporated this motif into the Cinderella plotline of the musical "Into the Woods". Giambattista Basile's "Cenerentola" combined them; the Cinderella figure, Zezolla, asks her father to commend her to the Dove of Fairies and ask her to send her something, and she receives a tree that will provide her clothing. Other variants have her helped by talking animals, as in "Katie Woodencloak", "Rushen Coatie", "Bawang Putih Bawang Merah", "The Story of Tam and Cam", or "The Sharp Grey Sheep"—these animals often having some connection with her dead mother; in "The Golden Slipper", a fish aids her after she puts it in water. In "The Anklet", it's a magical alabaster pot the girl purchased with her own money that brings her the gowns and the anklets she wears to the ball. Gioachino Rossini, having agreed to do an opera based on "Cinderella" if he could omit all magical elements, wrote "La Cenerentola", in which she was aided by Alidoro, a philosopher and formerly the Prince's tutor.
The midnight curfew is also absent in many versions; Cinderella leaves the ball to get home before her stepmother and stepsisters, or she is simply tired. In the Grimms' version, Aschenputtel slips away when she is tired, hiding on her father's estate in a tree, and then the pigeon coop, to elude her pursuers; her father tries to catch her by chopping them down, but she escapes.
Furthermore, the gathering need not be a ball; several variants on Cinderella, such as "Katie Woodencloak" and "The Golden Slipper" have her attend church.
In the three-ball version, Cinderella keeps a close watch on the time the first two nights and is able to leave without difficulty. However, on the third (or only) night, she loses track of the time and must flee the castle before her disguise vanishes. In her haste, she loses a glass slipper which the prince finds—or else the prince has carefully had her exit tarred, so as to catch her, and the slipper is caught in it.
The identifying item: The glass slipper is unique to Charles Perrault's version and its derivatives; in other versions of the tale it may be made of other materials (in the version recorded by the Brothers Grimm, German: "Aschenbroedel" and "Aschenputtel", for instance, it is gold) and in still other tellings, it is not a slipper but an anklet, a ring, or a bracelet that gives the prince the key to Cinderella's identity. In Rossini's opera ""La Cenerentola"" ("Cinderella"), the slipper is replaced by twin bracelets to prove her identity. In the Finnish variant "The Wonderful Birch" the prince uses tar to gain something every ball, and so has a ring, a circlet, and a pair of slippers. Interpreters unaware of the value attached to glass in 17th century France and perhaps troubled by sartorial impracticalities, have suggested that Perrault's "glass slipper" ("pantoufle de verre") had been a "squirrel fur slipper" ("pantoufle de vair") in some unidentified earlier version of the tale, and that Perrault or one of his sources confused the words; however, most scholars believe the glass slipper was a deliberate piece of poetic invention on Perrault's part. The 1950 Disney adaptation takes advantage of the slipper being made of glass to add a twist whereby the slipper is shattered just before Cinderella has the chance to try it on, leaving her with only the matching slipper with which to prove her identity.
Another interpretation of verre/vair (glass/fur) suggested a sexual element—the Prince was 'trying on' the 'fur slipper' (vagina) of the maidens in the kingdom, as a 'Droit du seigneur' right of sexual possession of his subjects. The disguised Cinderella's 'fur slipper' was of unique appeal to the Prince who sought her thereafter through sexual congress (a variety of sources including Joan Gould).
The translation of the story into cultures with different standards of beauty has left the significance of Cinderella's shoe size unclear, and resulted in the implausibility of Cinderella's feet being of a unique size for no particular reason. Humorous retellings of the story sometimes use the twist of having the shoes turn out to also fit somebody completely unsuitable, such as an amorous old crone. In Terry Pratchett's "Witches Abroad", the witches accuse another witch of manipulating the events because it was a common shoe size, and she could only ensure that the right woman put it on if she already knew where she was and went straight to her. In "When the Clock Strikes" (from "Red As Blood"), Tanith Lee had the sorcerous shoe alter shape whenever a woman tried to put it on, so it would not fit.
The Revelation: Cinderella's stepmother and stepsisters (in some versions just the stepsisters and, in some other versions, a stepfather and stepsisters) conspire to win the prince's hand for one of them. In the German telling, the first stepsister fits into the slipper by cutting off a toe, but the doves in the hazel tree alert the prince to the blood dripping from the slipper, and he returns the false bride to her mother. The second stepsister fits into the slipper by cutting off her heel, but the same doves give her away.
In many variants of the tale, the prince is told that Cinderella can not possibly be the one, as she is too dirty and ragged. Often, this is said by the stepmother or stepsisters. In the Grimms' version, both the stepmother and the father urge it. The prince nevertheless insists on her trying. Cinderella arrives and proves her identity by fitting into the slipper or other item (in some cases she has kept the other).
The Conclusion: In the German version of the story, the evil stepsisters are punished for their deception by having their eyes pecked out by birds. In other versions, they are forgiven, and made ladies-in-waiting with marriages to lesser lords.
In The Thousand Nights and A Night, in a tale called "The Anklet", the stepsisters make a comeback by using twelve magical hairpins to turn the bride into a dove on her wedding night. In "The Wonderful Birch", the stepmother, a witch, manages to substitute her daughter for the true bride after she has given birth. Such tales continue the fairy tale into what is in effect a second episode.
In an episode of Jim Henson's "The Storyteller", writer Anthony Minghella merged the old folk tale "Donkeyskin" (also written by Perrault) with "Cinderella" to tell the tale of "Sapsorrow", a girl both cursed and blessed by destiny.
Many popular new works based on the story feature one step-sister who is not as cruel to Cinderella as the other. Examples are the film Ever After, Cinderella 3 and the Broadway revival.
Revisionist retellings.
Ever After (known in promotional material as Ever After: A Cinderella Story) is a 1998 American romantic comedy-drama film inspired by the fairy tale Cinderella, directed by Andy Tennant and starring Drew Barrymore, Anjelica Huston, and Dougray Scott. The usual pantomime and comic/supernatural elements are removed and the story is instead treated as historical fiction, set in Renaissance-era France. It is often seen as a modern, post-feminism interpretation of the Cinderella myth.
There is also Gregory Maguire's novel "Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister", which gives the classic story from the view of one of the ugly stepsisters. In this version, the Cinderella character is unusually beautiful, but also a shy enigma. Her stepsister, though plain, is charming and intelligent. The novel has themes much more adult than the traditional story.
Likewise there is a Marissa Meyer novel "Cinder", which is set in a futuristic Beijing. The Cinderella character, named Cinder, is a cyborg mechanic, who meets Prince Kaito.
Gail Carson Levine wrote Ella Enchanted, a story about how "Ella" is under a fairy curse of obedience (she does whatever someone tells her to). A movie also has been made based on this book.
In 1982, Roald Dahl rewrote the story in a more modern and gruesome way in his book "Revolting Rhymes".
In his book "Dr. Gardner's Fairy Tales for Today's Children," Dr. Richard A. Gardener's story "Cinderelma" has the heroine Cinderelma and the prince re-unite, then mutually decide to separate. Cinderelma then gets a job as a seamstress, later opens her own dress shop, and marries a young printer who owns the shop next door to hers.
In 1995, Richard Conlon's play "Anastasia and Drizella" was produced at Chicago's Temporary Theatre. In it, Cinderella's step sister Anastasia gets a master's degree in finance, and her step sister Drizella gets a master's degree in chemical engineering. When the prince tries to have Cinderella's step family beheaded, Anastasia buys the kingdom. The prince and Cinderella get married, and spend the rest of their lives working as servants for Cinderella's step family, while the step sisters live happily ever after.
In the 2005 Ella's Big Chance by Shirley Hughes, Ella is a dressmaker in her father's shop, and when the stepsisters arrive they appoint themselves as models. Ella eventually chooses to marry Buttons, and employee in the shop, instead of the prince.
In 2014, Bad Wolf Press published a musical version called Cinderella: A Modern Makeover, a fractured interpretation of the story featuring a more positive "blended family" home life as well as a heroine trying to get her dream job at the palace instead of a marriage proposal.
Anne Sexton wrote an adaptation as a poem called "Cinderella" in her collection "Transformations" (1971), a book in which she re-envisions sixteen of the "Grimm's Fairy tales".
The Throne of Glass series, written by Sarah J. Maas, is inspired by the story of Cinderella.
Folkloristics.
Folklorists have long studied variants on this tale across cultures. In 1893, Marian Roalfe Cox, commissioned by the Folklore Society of Britain, produced "Cinderella: Three Hundred and Forty-Five Variants of Cinderella, Catskin and, Cap o'Rushes, Abstracted and Tabulated with a Discussion of Medieval Analogues and Notes."
Further morphology studies have continued on this seminal work.
The Aarne–Thompson system classifies "Cinderella" as type 510A, "the persecuted heroine". Others of this type include "The Sharp Grey Sheep"; "The Golden Slipper"; "The Story of Tam and Cam"; "Rushen Coatie"; "The Wonderful Birch"; "Fair, Brown and Trembling"; and "Katie Woodencloak".
Adaptations.
The story of Cinderella has formed the basis of many notable works:
Films and television.
Over the decades, hundreds of films have been made that are either direct adaptations from Cinderella or have plots loosely based on the story.
Cinderella theme.
The Aarne–Thompson system classifies Cinderella as type 510A, "the persecuted heroine". Variants of the theme are known throughout the world.
The Cinderella motif may well have originated in classical antiquity. The Greek geographer Strabo recorded in the 1st century BC in his "Geographica" (book 17, 33) the tale of the Greek slave girl Rhodopis, "Rosey-Eyes", who lived in the colony of Naucratis in Ancient Egypt. It is often considered the oldest known version of the story:
Herodotus, some five centuries before Strabo, supplied information about the real-life Rhodopis in his "Histories". He wrote that Rhodopis came from Thrace, and was the slave of Iadmon of Samos, and a fellow-slave of the story-teller Aesop. She was taken to Egypt in the time of Pharaoh Amasis, and freed there for a large sum by Charaxus of Mytilene, brother of Sappho the lyric poet.
Another synopsis is given by the Roman author Aelian (ca. 175–ca. 235), showing that the Cinderella theme remained popular throughout antiquity.
Aspects of Cinderella may be derived from the story of Cordelia in Geoffrey of Monmouth's "Historia Regum Britanniae". Cordelia is the youngest and most virtuous of King Leir of Britain's three daughters, however her virtue is such that it will not allow her to lie in flattering her father when he asks, so that he divides up the kingdom between the elder daughters and leaves Cordelia with nothing. Cordelia marries her love, Aganippus, King of the Franks, and flees to Gaul where she and her husband raise an army and depose her wicked sisters who have been misusing their father. Cordelia is finally crowned Queen of Britain. However her reign only lasts five years. The story is famously retold in Shakespeare's "King Lear", but given a tragic ending.
Another version of the story, "Ye Xian", appeared in "Miscellaneous Morsels from Youyang" by Duan Chengshi around 860. Here, the hardworking and lovely girl befriends a fish, the reincarnation of her mother, who was killed by her stepmother and sister. Ye Xian saves the bones, which are magic, and they help her dress appropriately for a festival. When she loses her slipper after being recognized by her stepfamily, the king finds her slipper and makes her his first wife (eventually rescuing her from her cruel stepmother).
The Indonesian and Malaysian story "Bawang Merah Bawang Putih", are about two girls named Bawang Putih (literally "White Onion", meaning "garlic") and Bawang Merah ("Red Onion"). While the two country's respective versions differ in the exact relationship of the girls and the identity of the protagonist, they have highly similar plot elements. Both have a magical fish as the "fairy godmother" to her daughter, which the antagonist cooks. The heroine then finds the bones and buries them, and over the grave a magical swing appears. The protagonist sits on the swing and sings to make it sway, her song reaching the ears of a passing Prince. The swing is akin to the slipper test, which distinguishes the heroine from her evil sister, and the Prince weds her in the end.
In the Vietnamese version "Tam Cam", Tam is mistreated by both her father's co-wife and half-sister, who stole her birthright by winning a wager of fishing unjustly proposed by the stepmother. The only fish that was left to her was killed and eaten by her step-family, but its bones served as her protector and guardian, eventually leading her to be the king's bride during a festival. The protagonist however, turns into the antagonist in part two of the story, by boiling her stepsister alive and then fooling her stepmother into cannibalism by feeding her her own daughter's flesh.
There is a Korean version named "Kongji and Patzzi". It tells a story about a kind girl Kongji who was constantly abused by her stepmother and stepsister Patzzi. The step-family forces Kongji to stay at home while they attend the king's ball, but a fairy appears and gives her an attire more beautiful than everyone else. The motif is the same as in Perrault, concerning a king falling in love with her. However, the story goes on with Patzzi drowning Kongji in a river and disguising herself as Kongji to live with the King. After the king finds out he puts Patzzi to death and feeds her to the unknowing stepmother.
Several variants of the story appear in the medieval "One Thousand and One Nights", also known as the "Arabian Nights", including "The Second Shaykh's Story", "The Eldest Lady's Tale" and "Abdallah ibn Fadil and His Brothers", all dealing with the theme of a younger sibling harassed by two jealous elders. In some of these, the siblings are female, while in others, they are male. One of the tales, "Judar and His Brethren", departs from the happy endings of previous variants and reworks the plot to give it a tragic ending instead, with the younger brother being poisoned by his elder brothers.
The Charles Dickens novel "David Copperfield" also shares similarities with Cinderella but is gender reversed (David has a passive mother who remarries with a cruel man after her husband passes).
References.
Notes

</doc>
<doc id="73455" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73455" title="The Exploits of Elaine">
The Exploits of Elaine

The Exploits of Elaine is a 1914 American film serial in the damsel in distress genre of "The Perils of Pauline" (1914).
"The Exploits of Elaine" tells the story of a young woman named Elaine who, with the help of a detective, tries to find the man, known only as "The Clutching Hand", who murdered her father. The Clutching Hand was the first mystery villain to appear in a film serial. The concept was widely used for the remainder of the format's existence.
The serial stars Pearl White (who also starred in "The Perils of Pauline"), Arnold Daly, Sheldon Lewis, Creighton Hale, and Riley Hatch. Lionel Barrymore had a small role. The serial was written by Arthur B. Reeve (novel), Charles W. Goddard, and George B. Seitz, and directed by Louis J. Gasnier, Seitz, and Leopold Wharton. The film was produced by the Whartons Studios and distributed by Pathé Exchange, the American distribution branch of the French company Pathé at that time. Pathé was the largest film equipment and production company in the world during the first part of the 20th century.
The film was followed in 1915 by "The New Exploits of Elaine".
The serial, which is extant, was named to the United States National Film Registry in 1994 for its cultural and historic importance.
Production.
"The Exploits of Elaine" was based on a book in the "Craig Kennedy, Scientific Detective" series by Arthur B. Reeve. It was a prototype for the scientific mystery serials but has less interest for later audiences. A lot of the technology and science demonstrated in the serial soon became out of date or considered mundane. For example, the serial has to explain the concept of fingerprinting in dramatic fashion. Nevertheless, the serial was a success on its release and led to two sequels, "The New Exploits of Elaine" (1915) and "The Romance of Elaine" (1915).
Cliffhangers.
Similar to other film serials, each chapter typically closed with a cliffhanger with Elaine in some physical peril or confronted with a shocking revelation. For example, at the close of Chapter 10 Elaine actually dies. She is then brought back to life in the next chapter by Craig Kennedy.
Critical reception.
In the opinion of film critic Stedman, this serial is an improvement on "The Perils of Pauline", with better acting, script, and direction.

</doc>
<doc id="73456" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73456" title="Lake Saint-Louis">
Lake Saint-Louis

Lake Saint-Louis is a lake in southwestern Quebec, Canada at the confluence of the Saint Lawrence and Ottawa Rivers. The St. Lawrence Seaway passes through the lake. 
Lake St. Louis is a widening of the St. Lawrence River in the Hochelaga Archipelago it is also fed by the Ottawa River via the lock in Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue, the Beauharnois Canal, the Soulanges Canal, the St. Louis River, and the Châteauguay River.
The lake is bounded to the north and east by the Island of Montreal, by Beauharnois-Salaberry, Roussillon, and Vaudreuil-Soulanges. The town of Beauharnois with its power-dam and canal lie to the south.
The West Island shore is mostly built-up with private houses, but includes some parks and clubs such as the Pointe-Claire Canoe Club, and the Pointe-Claire Yacht Club. Islands in the lake include l'Île-Dorval, and Dowker Island. Lake St. Louis is the second of three fluvial lakes on the St. Lawrence River. Upstream of it is Lake St. Francis, and downstream is Lake Saint-Pierre. Its average flow is .
Many species of fish are present in the lake, including yellow perch.
A small map by Samuel Champlain of 1611 names the lake. The same year, Champlain reported that a young man named Louys was drowned in what is now known as the Lachine Rapids, and in 1870 Charles-Honoré Laverdière stated that the rapids, and later the lake, were named in honour of the drowned man. A 1656 Jesuit account describes a crossing «Lac Saint Louys».
In 2014 there was a report of fecal coliform flowing into the lake from a Beaconsfield creek, and of PCBs flowing into it from a Pointe-Claire industrial site.

</doc>
<doc id="73457" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73457" title="The Fall of the House of Usher (1928 American film)">
The Fall of the House of Usher (1928 American film)

The Fall of the House of Usher (1928) is a short silent horror film adaptation of the short story, "The Fall of the House of Usher" by Edgar Allan Poe. It tells the story of a brother and sister who live under a family curse. The actors are Herbert Stern, Hildegarde Watson, and Melville Webber.
The movie was directed by James Sibley Watson and Melville Webber. A music score was written in 1959 for the film by Watson and Webber's friend, composer Alec Wilder.
Production.
An avant-garde experimental film, the visual element predominates, including shots through prisms to create optical distortion. There is no dialogue, though one part features letters moving across the screen.
Influence.
In 2000, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant film" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.

</doc>
<doc id="73458" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73458" title="Ottawa River">
Ottawa River

The Ottawa River (, Algonquin: "Kitchissippi"), is a river in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec. For most of its length, it defines the border between these two provinces.
Geography.
The river rises from its source in Lake Capimitchigama, in the Laurentian Mountains of central Quebec, and flows west to Lake Timiskaming. From there its route has been used to define the interprovincial border with Ontario.
From Lake Timiskaming, the river flows southeast to Ottawa and Gatineau, where it tumbles over the Chaudière Falls and further takes in the Rideau and Gatineau rivers.
The Ottawa River drains into the Lake of Two Mountains and the St. Lawrence River at Montreal. The river is long; it drains an area of , 65 percent in Quebec and the rest in Ontario, with a mean discharge of .
The average annual mean waterflow measured at Carillon dam, near the Lake of Two Mountains, is , with average annual extremes of . Record historic levels since 1964 are a low of in 2005 and a high of in 1976.
The river flows through large areas of deciduous and coniferous forest formed over thousands of years as trees recolonized the Ottawa Valley after the ice age. Generally, the coniferous forests occur on old sand plains left by retreating glaciers, or in wetter areas with clay substrate. The deciduous forests, dominated by maple, beech, oak and ash occur in more mesic areas with better soil. These primeval forests were occasionally affected by natural fire, mostly started by lightning, which led to increased reproduction by pine and oak, as well as fire barrens and their associated species. The vast areas of pine were exploited by early loggers. Later generations of logging removed hemlock for use in tanning leather, leaving a permanent deficit of hemlock in most forests. Associated with the logging and early settlement were vast wild fires which not only removed the forests, but led to soil erosion. Consequently, nearly all the forests show varying degrees of human disturbance. Tracts of older forest are uncommon, and hence they are considered of considerable importance for conservation.
The Ottawa River has large areas of wetlands. Some of the more biologically important wetland areas include (going downstream from Pembroke), the Westmeath sand dune/wetland complex, Mississippi Snye, Breckenridge Nature Reserve, Shirleys Bay, Ottawa Beach/Andrew Haydon Park, Petrie Island, the Duck Islands and Greens Creek. The Westmeath sand dune/wetland complex is significant for its relatively pristine sand dunes, few of which remain along the Ottawa River, and the many associated rare plants. Shirleys Bay has a biologically diverse shoreline alvar, as well as one of the largest silver maple swamps along the river. Like all wetlands, these depend upon the seasonal fluctuations in the water level. High water levels help create and maintain silver maple swamps, while low water periods allow many rare wetland plants to grow on the emerged sand and clay flats. There are five principal wetland vegetation types. One is swamp, mostly silver maple. There are four herbaceous vegetation types, named for the dominant plant species in them: "Scirpus", "Eleocharis", "Sparganium" and "Typha". Which type occurs in a particular location depends upon factors such as substrate type, water depth, ice-scour and fertility. Inland, and mostly south of the river, older river channels, which date back to the end of the ice age, and no longer have flowing water, have sometimes filled with a different wetland type, peat bog. Examples include Mer Bleue and Alfred Bog.
Major tributaries include:
communities along the Ottawa River include (in down-stream order):
Geology.
The Ottawa River lies in the Ottawa-Bonnechere Graben, which is a Mesozoic rift valley that formed 175 million years ago. Much of the river flows through the Canadian Shield, although lower areas flow through limestone plains and glacial deposits.
As the glacial ice sheet began to retreat at the end of the last ice age, the Ottawa River valley, which, along with the St. Lawrence River valley and Lake Champlain, had been depressed to below sea level by the glacier's weight, filled with sea water. The resulting arm of the ocean is known as the Champlain Sea. Fossil remains of marine life dating 12-10 thousand years ago have been found in marine clay throughout the region. Sand deposits from this era have produced vast plains, often dominated by pine forests, as well as localized areas of sand dunes, such as Westmeath and Constance Bay. Clay deposits from this period have resulted in areas of poor drainage, large swamps, and peat bogs in some ancient channels of this river. Hence, the distribution of forests and wetlands is very much a product of these past glacial events.
Large deposits of a material commonly known as Leda clay also formed. These deposits become highly unstable after heavy rains. Numerous landslides have occurred as a result. The former site of the town of Lemieux, Ontario collapsed into the South Nation River in 1993. The town's residents had previously been relocated because of the suspected instability of the earth in that location.
As the land gradually rose again the sea coast retreated and the fresh water courses of today took shape. Following the demise of the Champlain Sea the Ottawa River Valley continued to drain the waters of the emerging Upper Great Lakes basin through Lake Nipissing and the Mattawa River. Owing to the ongoing uplift of the land, the eastward flow became blocked around 4000 years ago. Thereafter Lake Nipissing drained westward, through the French River which later became a link in the historic canoe route to the West.
History.
As it does to this day, the river played a vital role in life of the Algonquin people, who lived throughout its watershed at contact. The river is called "Kichisìpi", meaning "Great River" in Anicinàbemowin, the Algonquin language. The Algonquin define themselves in terms of their position on the river, referring to themselves as the Omàmiwinini, 'down-river people'. Although a majority of the Algonquin First Nation lives in Quebec, the entire Ottawa Valley is Algonquin traditional territory. Present settlement is a result of adaptations made as a result of settler pressures.
Some early European explorers, possibly considering the Ottawa River to be more significant than the Upper St. Lawrence River, applied the name "River Canada" to the Ottawa River and the St. Lawrence River below the confluence at Montreal. As the extent of the Great Lakes became clear and the river began to be regarded as a tributary, it was variously known as the "Grand River", "Great River" or "Grand River of the Algonquins" before the present name was settled upon. This name change resulted from the Ottawa peoples' control of the river circa 1685. However, only one band of Ottawa, the Kinouncherpirini or Keinouch, ever inhabited the Ottawa Valley.
In 1615, Samuel de Champlain and Étienne Brûlé, assisted by Algonquin guides, were the first Europeans to travel up the Ottawa River and follow the water route west along the Mattawa and French Rivers to the Great Lakes. See Canadian Canoe Routes (early). For the following two centuries, this route was used by French fur traders, voyageurs and coureurs des bois to Canada's interior. The river posed serious hazards to these travelers. The section near Deux Rivières used to have spectacular and wild rapids, namely the "Rapide de la Veillée", the "Trou", the "Rapide des Deux Rivières", and the "Rapide de la Roche Capitaine". In 1800, explorer Daniel Harmon reported 14 crosses marking the deaths of voyageurs who had drowned in the dangerous waters along this section of the Ottawa.
The main trading posts along the river were: Lachine, Fort Coulonge, Lac des Allumettes, Mattawa House, where west-bound canoes left the river and Fort Témiscamingue. From Lake Timiskaming a portage led north to the Abitibi River and James Bay.
In the early 19th century, the Ottawa River and its tributaries were used to gain access to large virgin forests of white pine. A booming trade in timber developed, and large rafts of logs were floated down the river. A scattering of small subsistence farming communities developed along the shores of the river to provide manpower for the lumber camps in winter. In 1832, following the War of 1812, the Ottawa River gained strategic importance when the Carillon Canal was completed. Together with the Rideau Canal, the Carillon Canal was constructed to provide an alternate military supply route to Kingston and Lake Ontario, bypassing the route along the Saint Lawrence River.
Power generation.
A pulp and paper mill (at Témiscaming) and several hydroelectric dams have been constructed on the river. In 1950, the dam at Rapides-des-Joachims, was built, forming Holden Lake behind it and thereby submerging the rapids and portages at Deux Rivières. These hydro dams have had negative effects upon shoreline and wetland ecosystems, and are thought to also be responsible for the near extermination of American eels, which were once an abundant species in the river, but which are now uncommon. As an economic route, its importance was eclipsed by railroad and highways in the 20th century. It is no longer used for log driving, however, it is still extensively used for recreational boating. Some 20,000 pleasure boaters visit the Carillon Canal annually.
Today, Outaouais Herald Emeritus at the Canadian Heraldic Authority is named after the river.
Hydroelectric installations.
Hydroelectric installations on the Upper Ottawa (in downstream order):
Lower Ottawa (in downstream order):

</doc>
<doc id="73459" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73459" title="Yupik peoples">
Yupik peoples

The Yupik are a group of indigenous or aboriginal peoples of western, southwestern, and southcentral Alaska and the Russian Far East. They are Eskimo and are related to the Inuit and Iñupiat peoples. Yupik peoples include the following:
Population.
The Central Alaskan Yupik are by far the most numerous of the various Alaska Native groups and speak the Central Alaskan Yup'ik language, a member of the Eskimo–Aleut family of languages. 
As of the 2001 U.S. Census, the Yupik population in the United States numbered over 24,000, of whom over 22,000 lived in Alaska, the vast majority in the seventy or so communities in the traditional Yup'ik territory of western and southwestern Alaska. US census data for Yupik include 2,355 Sugpiaq; there are also 1,700 Yupik living in Russia. 
Etymology of name.
"Yup'ik" (plural "Yupiit") comes from the Yup'ik word "yuk" meaning "person" plus the post-base "-pik" meaning "real" or "genuine." Thus, it means literally "real people." The ethnographic literature sometimes refers to the Yup'ik people or their language as "Yuk" or "Yuit". In the Hooper Bay-Chevak and Nunivak dialects of Yup'ik, both the language and the people are known as "Cup'ik".
The use of an apostrophe in the name “Yup’ik”, compared to Siberian “Yupik,” exemplifies the Central Yup’ik’s orthography, where “the apostrophe represents gemination lengthening of the ‘p’ sound”.
The "person/people" (human being) in the Eskimo (Yupik and Inuit) languages:
Origins.
The common ancestors of the Eskimo and Aleut (as well as various Paleo-Siberian groups) are believed by archaeologists to have their origin in eastern Siberia, arriving in the Bering Sea area about 10,000 years ago. Research on blood types, confirmed by later linguistic and DNA findings, suggests that the ancestors of American Indians reached North America before the ancestors of the Eskimo and Aleut. There appear to have been several waves of migration from Siberia to the Americas by way of the Bering land bridge. which became exposed between 20,000 and 8,000 years ago during periods of glaciation. By about 3,000 years ago, the progenitors of the Yupiit had settled along the coastal areas of what would become western Alaska, with migrations up the coastal rivers—notably the Yukon and Kuskokwim—around 1400 AD, eventually reaching as far upriver as Paimiut on the Yukon and Crow Village on the Kuskokwim.
Culture.
Traditionally, families spent the spring and summer at fish camp, then joined with others at village sites for the winter. Many families still harvest the traditional subsistence resources, especially Pacific salmon and seal.
The men's communal house, the "qasgiq", was the community center for ceremonies and festivals which included singing, dancing, and storytelling. The qasgiq was used mainly in the winter months, because people would travel in family groups following food sources throughout the spring, summer, and fall months. Aside from ceremonies and festivals, it was also where the men taught the young boys survival and hunting skills, as well as other life lessons. The young boys were also taught how to make tools and qayaqs (kayaks) during the winter months in the qasgiq. The ceremonies involve a shaman.
The women's house, the "ena", was traditionally right next door. In some areas they were connected by a tunnel. Women taught the young girls how to tan hides and sew, process and cook game and fish, and weave. Boys would live with their mothers until they were about five years old, then they would live in the qasgiq. Each winter, for a period of between three to six weeks, the young boys and young girls would switch, with the men teaching the girls survival and hunting skills and toolmaking, and the women teaching the boys how to sew and cook.
In Yup'ik group dances, individuals often remain stationary while moving their upper body and arms rhythmically, their gestures accentuated by hand held dance fans, very similar in design to Cherokee dance fans. The limited motion by no means limits the expressiveness of the dances, which can be gracefully flowing, bursting with energy, or wryly humorous.
The Yup'ik are unique among native peoples of the Americas in that they name children after the last person in the community to have died.
The kuspuk ("qaspeq") is a traditional Yup'ik garment, worn in both casual and formal settings in Alaska.
Languages.
The five Yupik languages (related to Inuktitut) are still very widely spoken; more than 75% of the Yupik/Yup'ik population are fluent in the language.
The Alaskan and Siberian Yupik, like the Alaskan Inupiat,adopted the system of writing developed by Moravian Church missionaries during the 1760s in Greenland. The Alaskan Yupik and Inupiat are the only Northern indigenous peoples to have developed their own system of hieroglyphics, but this system that died with its creators. Late nineteenth-century Moravian missionaries to the Yupik in southwestern Alaska used Yupik in church services, and translated the scriptures into the people's language. 
Russian explorers in the 1800s erroneously called the Yupik people bordering the territory of the somewhat unrelated Aleut as also Aleut, or "Alutiiq," in Yupik. By tradition, this term has remained in use, as well as "Sugpiaq," both of which refer to the Yupik of South Central Alaska and Kodiak.
The whole Eskimo–Aleut language family, and also all Alaskan languages are shown below. Here is a wikified version of the mentioned tree (restricted to the Eskimo–Aleut family):

</doc>
<doc id="73460" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73460" title="Fantasia (1940 film)">
Fantasia (1940 film)

Fantasia is a 1940 American animated film produced by Walt Disney and released by Walt Disney Productions. With story direction by Joe Grant and Dick Huemer, and production supervision by Ben Sharpsteen, it is the third feature in the Disney animated features canon. The film consists of eight animated segments set to pieces of classical music conducted by Leopold Stokowski, seven of which are performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra. Music critic and composer Deems Taylor acts as the film's Master of Ceremonies, providing a live-action introduction to each animated segment.
Disney settled on the film's concept as work neared completion on "The Sorcerer's Apprentice", an elaborate "Silly Symphonies" short designed as a comeback role for Mickey Mouse, who had declined in popularity. As production costs grew higher than what it could earn, Disney decided to include the short in a feature-length film with other segments set to classical pieces. The soundtrack was recorded using multiple audio channels and reproduced with Fantasound, a pioneering sound reproduction system that made "Fantasia" the first commercial film shown in stereophonic sound.
"Fantasia" was first released in theatrical roadshow engagements held in thirteen U.S. cities from November 13, 1940. It received mixed critical reaction and was unable to make a profit due to World War II cutting off distribution to the European market, the film's high production costs, and the expense of leasing theatres and installing the Fantasound equipment for the roadshow presentations. The film was subsequently reissued multiple times with its original footage and audio being deleted, modified, or restored in each version. As of 2012, "Fantasia" has grossed $76.4 million in domestic revenue and is the 22nd highest-grossing film of all time in the U.S. when adjusted for inflation. "Fantasia", as a franchise, has grown to include video games, Disneyland attractions, a live concert, and a theatrically released sequel ("Fantasia 2000") co-produced by Walt's nephew Roy E. Disney in 1999. "Fantasia" has grown in reputation over the years and is now widely acclaimed; in 1998 the American Film Institute ranked it as the 58th greatest American film in their 100 Years...100 Movies and the fifth greatest animated film in their 10 Top 10 list.
Program.
"Fantasia" opens with live action scenes of members of an orchestra gathering against a blue background and tuning their instruments in half-light, half-shadow. Master of ceremonies Deems Taylor enters the stage (also in half-light, half-shadow) and introduces the program.
Production.
Origins.
In 1936, Walt Disney felt that the Disney studio's star character Mickey Mouse needed a boost in popularity. He decided to feature the mouse in "The Sorcerer's Apprentice", a deluxe cartoon short based on the poem written by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and set to the orchestral piece by Paul Dukas inspired by the original tale. The concept of matching animation to classical music was used as early as 1928 in Disney's cartoon series, the "Silly Symphonies", but he wanted to go beyond the usual slapstick, and produce shorts where "sheer fantasy unfolds ... action controlled by a musical pattern has great charm in the realm of unreality." Upon receiving the rights to use the music by the end of July 1937, Disney considered using a well-known conductor to record the music for added prestige. He happened to meet Leopold Stokowski, conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra since 1912, at Chasen's restaurant in Hollywood, and talked about his plans for the short. Stokowski recalled that he did "like the music"; was happy to collaborate on the project, and offered to conduct the piece at no cost.
Following their meeting, Disney's New York representative ran into Stokowski on a train headed for the East Coast. In writing to Disney, he reported that Stokowski was "really serious in his offer to do the music for nothing. He had some very interesting ideas on instrumental coloring, which would be perfect for an animation medium". In his excited response dated October 26, 1937, Disney wrote that he felt "all steamed up over the idea of Stokowski working with us ... The union of Stokowski and his music, together with the best of our medium, would be the means of a success and should lead to a new style of motion picture presentation." He had already begun working on a story outline, and wished to use "the finest men ... from color ... down to animators" on the short. "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" was to be promoted as a "special" and rented to theatres as a unique film, outside of the Mickey Mouse cartoon series.
An agreement signed by Disney and Stokowski on December 16, 1937, allowed the conductor to "select and employ a complete symphony orchestra" for the recording. Disney hired a stage at the Culver Studios in California for the session. It began at midnight on January 9, 1938, and lasted for three hours using eighty-five Hollywood musicians. As production costs of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" climbed to $125,000, it became clearer to Disney and his brother Roy, who managed the studio's finances, that the short could never earn such a sum back on its own. Roy wanted his brother to keep any additional costs on the film to a minimum. He said, "because of its very experimental and unprecedented nature ... we have no idea what can be expected from such a production." Ben Sharpsteen, a production supervisor on "Fantasia", noted that its budget was three to four times greater than the usual "Silly Symphony", but Disney "saw this trouble in the form of an opportunity. This was the birth of a new concept, a group of separate numbers—regardless of their running time—put together in a single presentation. It turned out to be a concert—something novel and of high quality."
Ideas to produce a complete feature film were pursued in February 1938, when inquiries were made to extend Stokowski's contract. In August, Disney asked Stokowski's representative to have him return to the studios to select material for the new film, which was initially titled "The Concert Feature". The pair further thought of presenting the film with an on-screen host to introduce each number in the program. Both had heard composer and music critic Deems Taylor provide intermission commentary during radio broadcasts of the New York Philharmonic, and agreed he would be most suitable for the role. Disney did contact Taylor about the project, but by then work on "Pinocchio", "Bambi", and development on his new Burbank studio kept him too busy to work on the new feature. In a change of plans, Taylor was asked during a call on September 3, 1938, leave to come to the studios as soon as possible. He left New York City for Los Angeles by train two days later for a month's visit.
Development.
Taylor arrived at the studio one day after a series of meetings began to select the musical pieces for "The Concert Feature". Disney made story writers Joe Grant and Dick Huemer gather a preliminary selection of music and along with Stokowski, Taylor, and the heads of various departments, discussed their ideas. Each meeting was recorded verbatim by stenographers with participants being given a copy of the entire conversation for review. As selections were considered, a recording of the piece was located and played back at the next gathering. Disney did not contribute much to early discussions; he admitted that his knowledge of music was instinctive and untrained. In one meeting, he inquired about a piece "on which we might build something of a prehistoric theme ... with animals". The group was considering "The Firebird" by Igor Stravinsky, but Taylor noted that his ""Le Sacre du printemps" would be something on that order", to which Disney replied upon hearing a recording, "This is marvelous! It would be perfect for prehistoric animals. There would be something terrific in dinosaurs, flying lizards, and prehistoric monsters. There could be beauty in the settings."
Numerous choices were discarded as talks continued, including "Moto Perpetuo" by Niccolò Paganini with "shots of dynamos, cogs, pistons" and "whirling wheels" to show the production of a collar button. Other deleted material included "Prelude in G minor" and "Troika" by Sergei Rachmaninoff, and a rendition of "The Song of the Flea" by Mussorgsky, which was to be sung by Lawrence Tibbett. On September 29, 1938, around sixty of Disney's artists gathered for a two-and-a-half hour piano concert while he provided a running commentary about the new musical feature. A rough version of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" was also shown that, according to one attendee, had the crowd applauding and cheering "until their hands were red." The final pieces were chosen the following morning, which included "Toccata and Fugue in D minor", "Cydalise et le Chèvre-pied" by Gabriel Pierné, "The Nutcracker Suite", "Night on Bald Mountain", "Ave Maria", "Dance of the Hours", "Clair de Lune" by Claude Debussy, "The Rite of Spring" and "The Sorcerer's Apprentice". Disney had already begun working out the details for the segments, and showed greater enthusiasm and eagerness as opposed to his anxiety while starting on "Pinocchio".
"Clair de Lune" was soon removed from the "Fantasia" program, but Disney and his writers encountered problems of setting a concrete story to "Cydalise". Its opening march, "The Entry of the Little Fauns", attracted Disney to the piece which at first provided suitable depictions of fauns he wanted. On January 5, 1939, following a search for a stronger piece to fit the mythological theme, the piece was replaced with sections of Beethoven's sixth symphony. Stokowski disagreed with the switch, believing that Disney's "idea of mythology ... is not quite what this symphony is about". He was also concerned about the reception from classical music enthusiasts who would criticize Disney for venturing too far from the composer's intent. Taylor on the other hand welcomed the change, describing it as "a stunning one", and saw "no possible objection to it".
The new feature continued to be known as "The Concert Feature" or "Musical Feature" as late as November 1938. Hal Horne, a publicist for Disney's film distributor RKO Radio Pictures, wished for a different title, and gave the suggestion "Filmharmonic Concert". Stuart Buchanan then held a contest at the studio for a title that produced almost 1,800 suggestions including "Bach to Stravinsky and Bach" and "Highbrowski by Stokowski". Still, the favorite among the film's supervisors was "Fantasia", an early working title that had even grown on Horne, "It isn't the word alone but the meaning we read into it." From the beginning of its development, Disney expressed the greater importance of music in "Fantasia" compared to his past work: "In our ordinary stuff, our music is always under action, but on this ... we're supposed to be picturing this music—not the music fitting our story." Disney had hoped that the film would bring classical music to people that, including himself, had "walked out on this kind of stuff."
Design and animation.
Animation on "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" began on January 21, 1938, when James Algar, the director of the segment, assigned animator Preston Blair to work on the scene when Mickey Mouse wakes from his dream. Each of the seven hundred members of staff at the time received a synopsis of Goethe's 1797 poem "Der Zauberlehrling", and were encouraged to complete a twenty-question form that requested their ideas on what action might take place. Layout artist Tom Codrick created what Dick Huemer described as "brilliantly colored thumbnails" from preliminary storyboard sketches using gouache paints, which featured bolder use of color and lighting than any previous Disney short. Mickey was redesigned by animator Fred Moore who added pupils to his eyes for the first time to achieve greater ranges of expression. Most of the segment was shot in live action, including a scene where a UCLA athlete was asked to run and jump across one of the studio's sound stages with barrels in the way, which was used for reference when Mickey traverses through water.
Disney had been interested in producing abstract animation since he saw "A Color Box" by Len Lye from 1935. He explained the work done in the "Toccata and Fugue" was "no sudden idea ... they were something we had nursed along several years but we never had a chance to try". Preliminary designs included those from effects animator Cy Young, who produced drawings influenced by the patterns on the edge of a piece of sound film. In late 1938 Disney hired Oskar Fischinger, a German artist who had produced numerous abstract animated films, including some with classical music, to work with Young. Upon review of three leica reels produced by the two, Disney rejected all three. According to Huemer all Fishinger "did was little triangles and designs ... it didn't come off at all. Too dinky, Walt said." Fischinger, like Disney, was used to having full control over his work and was not used to working in a group. Feeling his designs were too abstract for a mass audience, Fishinger left the studio in apparent despair, before the segment was completed, in October 1939. Disney had plans to make the "Toccata and Fugue" an experimental three-dimensional film, with audiences being given cardboard stereoscopic frames with their souvenir programs, but this idea was abandoned.
In "The Nutcracker Suite", animator Art Babbitt is said to have credited The Three Stooges as a guide for animating the dancing mushrooms in the "Chinese Dance" routine. He drew with a music score pinned to his desk to work out the choreography so he could relate the action to the melody and the counterpoint, "those nasty little notes underneath ... so something has to be related to that". The studio filmed professional dancers Joyce Coles and Marjorie Belcher wearing ballet skirts that resembled shapes of blossoms that were to sit above water for "Dance of the Flutes". An Arabian dancer was also brought in to study the movements for the goldfish in "Arab Dance".
An early concept for "The Rite of Spring" was to extend the story to the age of mammals and the first humans and the discovery of fire and man's triumph. John Hubley, the segment's art director, explained that it was later curtailed by Disney to avoid controversy from creationists, who promised to make trouble should he connect evolution with humans. To gain a better understanding of the history of the planet the studio received guidance from Roy Chapman Andrews, the director of the American Museum of Natural History, English biologist Julian Huxley, paleontologist Barnum Brown, and astronomer Edwin Hubble. Animators studied comets and nebulae at the Mount Wilson Observatory, and observed a herd of iguanas and a baby alligator that were brought into the studio. The camera was kept at a low position throughout the segment to heighten the immensity of the dinosaurs.
According to Ward Kimball, the animators were "extremely specific on touchy issues". In the making of "The Pastoral Symphony" Greek mythological segment, the female centaurs were originally drawn bare-breasted, but the Hays office enforcing the Motion Picture Production Code insisted that they discreetly hung garlands around the necks. The male centaurs were also toned down to appear less intimidating to the audience. Originally black female centaurs "braided 'pickaninny' hair, shining the hooves and grooming the tails of white centaurs" appeared in the film, but this was cut out years later for racial prejudicial reasons (see Controversies).
For inspiration on the routines in "Dance of the Hours", animators studied real life ballet performers including Marge Champion and Irina Baronova. Animator John Hench was assigned to work on the segment, but resisted as he knew little about ballet. Disney then gave Hench season tickets to the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo with backstage access so he could learn more about it. Béla Lugosi, best known for his role in "Dracula", was brought in to provide reference poses for Chernabog. As animator Bill Tytla disliked the results, he used colleague Wilfred Jackson to pose shirtless which gave him the images he needed. According to R. D. Feild's "The Art of Walt Disney", in order to draw Hyacinth, the hippo prima ballerina, a woman weighing over was brought onto the live-action stage and her movements were recorded by cameramen, recording the "least quiver of her flesh, noticing those parts of her anatomy that were subjected to the greatest stress and strain". There were ideas of releasing scents throughout the theater during "Fantasia", including the smell of incense during "Ave Maria".
Over one thousand artists and technicians were used in the making of "Fantasia", which features more than 500 animated characters. Segments were color-keyed scene by scene so the colors in a single shot would harmonize between proceeding and following ones. Before a segment's narrative pattern was complete, an overall color scheme was designed to the general mood of the music, and patterned to correspond with the development of the subject matter. The studio's character model department would also sculpt three-dimensional clay models so the animators could view their subject from all angles.
Soundtrack.
Recording.
Disney wanted to experiment in more sophisticated sound recording and reproduction techniques for "Fantasia". "Music emerging from one speaker behind the screen sounds thin, tinkly and strainy. We wanted to reproduce such beautiful masterpieces ... so that audiences would feel as though they were standing at the podium with Stokowski". For the recording of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" in January 1938, engineers at Disney collaborated with RCA Corporation for using multiple audio channels which allowed any desired dynamic balance to be achieved upon playback. The stage was altered acoustically with double plywood semi-circular partitions that separated the orchestra into five sections to increase reverberation. Though as the production of "Fantasia" developed, the setup used for "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" was abandoned for different multi-channel recording arrangements.
On January 18, 1939, Stokowski signed an eighteen-month contract with Disney to conduct the remaining pieces with the Philadelphia Orchestra. Recording began that April and lasted for seven weeks at the Academy of Music, the orchestra's home which was chosen for its excellent acoustics. In the recording sessions, thirty-three microphones were placed around the orchestra that captured the music onto eight optical sound recording machines placed in the hall's basement. Each one represented an audio channel that focused on a different section of instruments: cellos and basses, violins, brass, violas, and woodwinds and tympani. The seventh channel was a combination of the first six while the eighth provided an overall sound of the orchestra at a distance. A ninth was later added to provide a click track function for the animators to time their drawings to the music. In the forty-two days of recording of film was used. Disney paid all the expenses which included the musician's wages, stage personnel, a music librarian, and the orchestra's manager that cost almost $18,000. When the finished recordings arrived at the studio, a meeting was held on July 14, 1939, to allow the artists working on each segment to listen to Stokowski's arrangements, and suggest alterations in the sound to work more effectively with their designs.
Fantasound.
The Disney brothers contacted David Sarnoff of RCA regarding the manufacture of a new system that would "create the illusion that the actual symphony orchestra is playing in the theater." Sarnoff backed out at first due to financial reasons, but agreed in July 1939 to make the equipment so long as the Disneys could hold down the estimated $200,000 in costs. Though it was not exactly known how to achieve their goal, engineers at Disney and RCA investigated many ideas and tests made with various equipment setups. The collaboration led to the development of Fantasound, a pioneering stereophonic surround sound system which innovated some processes widely used today, including simultaneous multi-track recording, overdubbing, and noise reduction.
Fantasound, developed in part by Disney engineer William Garity, employed two projectors running at the same time. With one containing the picture film with a mono soundtrack for backup purposes, the other ran a sound film that was mixed from the eight tracks recorded at the Academy to four: three of which contained the audio for the left, center, and right stage speakers respectively, while the fourth became a control track with amplitude and frequency tones that drove variable-gain amplifiers to control the volume of the three audio tracks. In addition were three "house" speakers placed on the left, right, and center of the auditorium that derived from the left and right stage channels which acted as surround channels. As the original recording was captured at almost peak modulation to increase signal-to-noise ratio, the control track was used to restore the dynamics to where Stokowski thought they should be. For this, a tone-operated gain-adjusting device was built to control the levels of each of the three audio tracks through the amplifiers.
The illusion of sound traveling across the speakers was achieved with a device named the "pan pot", which directed the predetermined movement of each audio channel with the control track. Mixing of the soundtrack required six people to operate the various pan pots in real time, while Stokowski directed each level and pan change which was marked on his musical score. To monitor the recording levels at lower frequencies, Disney ordered eight three-color oscillators from the newly established Hewlett-Packard company, a predecessor from VU meters used today. Between the individual takes, prints, and remakes, approximately three million feet of sound film was used in the production of "Fantasia". Almost a fifth of the film's budget was spent on its recording techniques.
Release history.
Theatrical runs.
1940–1941 roadshows with Fantasound.
RKO balked at the idea of distributing "Fantasia", which it described as a "longhair musical", and believed its duration of two hours and five minutes plus intermission was too long for a general release. It relaxed its exclusive distribution contract with Disney, who wanted a more prestigious exhibit in the form of a limited-run roadshow attraction. A total of thirteen roadshows were held across the United States; each involving two daily screenings with seat reservations booked in advance at higher prices and a fifteen-minute intermission. Disney hired film salesman Irving Ludwig to manage the first eleven engagements, who was given specific instructions regarding each aspect of the film's presentation, including the setup of outside theater marquees and curtain and lighting cues. Patrons were taken to their seats by staff hired and trained by Disney, and were given a program booklet illustrated by Gyo Fujikawa.
The first roadshow opened at the Broadway Theatre in New York City on November 13, 1940. The Disneys had secured a year's lease with the venue that was fully equipped with Fantasound, which took personnel a week working around the clock to install. Proceeds made on the night went to the British War Relief Society for the efforts in the Battle of Britain. Ticket demand was so great that eight telephone operators were employed to handle the extra calls while the adjoining store was rented out to cater the box office bookings. "Fantasia" ran at the Broadway for forty-nine consecutive weeks, the longest run achieved by a film at the time. Its run continued for a total of fifty-seven weeks until February 28, 1942.
The remaining twelve roadshows were held throughout 1941, which included a 39-week run at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles from January 29. "Fantasia" broke the long-run record at the venue in its twenty-eighth week; a record previously held by "Gone with the Wind". Its eight-week run at the Fulton Theatre in Pittsburgh attracted over 50,000 people with reservations being made from cities located one hundred miles from the venue. Engagements were also held at the Geary Theatre in San Francisco for eight months, the Hanna Theatre in Cleveland for nine weeks, the Majestic Theatre in Boston, the Apollo Theater in Chicago, and also in Philadelphia, Detroit, Buffalo, Minneapolis, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore.
"Fantasia" grossed over $300,000 in the first sixteen weeks in New York; over $20,000 in the opening five weeks in San Francisco; and almost the same amount in the first ten weeks both in Los Angeles and Boston. The first eleven roadshows earned a total of $1.3 million by April 1941, but the $85,000 in production and installation costs of a single Fantasound setup, along with theatres having to be leased, forced Disney to exceed their loan limits. The onset of the Second World War prevented plans for a potential release in Europe, normally the source of as much as forty-five per cent of the studio's income. Up to eighty-eight engagements were outlined across five years, but wartime demands for material limited the number of Fantasound prints to sixteen. All but one of the Fantasound setups were dismantled and given to the war effort. Upon acquiring the film's distribution rights in April 1941, RKO initially continued the roadshow booking policy but presented the film in mono, which was easier to exhibit. The combined average receipts from each roadshow was around $325,000, which placed "Fantasia" at an even greater loss than "Pinocchio".
1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs.
Disney allowed RKO to handle the general release of "Fantasia", but fought their decision to have the film cut. He gave in as the studio needed as much income as possible to remedy its finances, but refused to cut it himself, "You can get anybody you want to edit it ... I can't do it." With no input from Disney, musical director Ed Plumb and Ben Sharpsteen reduced "Fantasia" to one hour and forty minutes at first, then to one hour and twenty minutes by removing most of Taylor's commentary and the "Toccata and Fugue". "Fantasia" was re-released in January 1942 at more popular prices with a mono soundtrack, and was placed on the lower half of double bills with the Western film "Valley of the Sun".
RKO reissued "Fantasia" once more on September 1, 1946, with the animated sequences complete and the scenes of Taylor, Stokowski, and the orchestra restored but shortened. Its running time was restored to one hour and fifty-five minutes. This edit would be the standard form for subsequent re-releases, and was the basis for the 1990 restoration.
By 1955 the original sound negatives began to deteriorate, though a four-track copy had survived in good condition. Using the remaining Fantasound system at the studio, a three-track stereo copy was transferred across telephone wires onto magnetic film at an RCA facility in Hollywood. This copy was used when "Fantasia" was reissued in stereo by Buena Vista Distribution in SuperScope, a derivative of the anamorphic widescreen CinemaScope format, on February 7, 1956. The projector featured an automatic control mechanism designed by Disney engineers that was coupled to a variable anamorphic lens, which allowed the picture to switch between its Academy standard aspect ratio of 1.33:1 to the wide ratio of 2.35:1 in twenty seconds without a break in the film. This was achieved by placing the cues that controlled the mechanism on a separate track in addition to the three audio channels. Only selected parts of the animation were stretched, while all live action scenes remained unchanged. This reissue garnered some criticism from viewers, as the widescreen format led to the cropping and reframing of the images.
On February 20, 1963, "Fantasia" was re-released in both standard and SuperScope versions with stereo sound, though existing records are unclear. Its running time was fifty-six seconds longer than the previous issue which is unexplained. This was the final release that occurred before Disney's death in 1966.
1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs.
"Fantasia" began to make a profit from its $2.28 million budget after its return to theaters on December 17, 1969. The film was promoted with a psychedelic-styled advertising campaign, and it became popular among teenagers and college students who were reported to have taken drugs for a psychedelic experience. Animator Ollie Johnston recalled that young people "thought we were on a trip when we made it ... every time we'd go to talk to a school or something, they'd ask us what we were on." The release is also noted for the controversial removal of four scenes from "The Pastoral Symphony" over racial stereotyping. "Fantasia" was issued on a regular basis, typically for exhibition in art houses in college towns, until the mid-1970s.
The film was reissued nationwide once more on April 15, 1977, this time with simulated stereo sound. This edit featured the RKO distribution logo being replaced with that of Buena Vista Distribution, since RKO had not been part of a release since 1946. It had not been removed earlier as the credit sequence would have required to be re-shot. A two-and-a-half-minute reduction in the film's running time in this version remains unclear in existing records.
For the 1982 and 1985 releases Disney presented "Fantasia" with a completely new soundtrack recorded in Dolby Stereo. First released on April 2, 1982, this version of the film marked the first time a film's soundtrack had been digitally re-recorded in its entirety. To replace Stokowski's recordings, the noted film conductor Irwin Kostal was engaged. He directed a 121-piece orchestra and 50-voice choir for the recording that took place over eighteen sessions and cost $1 million. To maintain continuity with the animation Kostal based his performance on the tempos and pacing of the Stokowski recordings, including the cuts and revisions to "The Rite of Spring". However, for "Night on Bald Mountain" he used Mussorgsky's original orchestration instead of Leopold Stokowski's own edition that was part of the original soundtrack. The new recording also corrected a two-frame lag in projection caused by the old recording techniques used in the 1930s. Deems Taylor's scenes were deleted and a much briefer voiceover narration was recorded by Hugh Douglas as the studio felt the modern audience "is more sophisticated and knowledgeable about music." This version returned to around 400 theaters in 1985, this time with actor Tim Matheson providing the narration.
For its fiftieth anniversary, "Fantasia" returned to 550 theaters nationwide on October 5, 1990, in its traditional 1946 version including the live action scenes with Taylor and the original Stokowski score. The film underwent a two-year restoration process which began after a six-month search to piece together the original negatives that had been in storage since 1946. This marked the first time since then that a release of the film had been processed from the original and not from a copy. Each of its 535,680 frames were restored at YCM Laboratories, and an untouched print from 1951 was used for guidance on color and tone. Theaters were required to have specific stereo equipment installed, and to present the film in its original 1.33:1 aspect ratio with black borders on the side of their screens. The Stokowski soundtrack was digitally remastered using the 1955 magnetic soundtrack, with an estimated three thousand pops and hisses being removed in the process. The 1990 reissue of "Fantasia" went on to gross $25 million domestically.
Home media.
Audio.
Disney considered releasing a multi-disc 78-rpm record album of "Fantasia"'s soundtrack in conjunction with the film's 1940 roadshow release, but this idea was not realized. The soundtrack was ultimately released as a three record LP set in sixteen countries by Disneyland Records in 1957 under the catalog number WDX-101. Disney was required to obtain permission from Stokowski, who initially rejected the deal unless the Philadelphia Orchestra Association received a share of the royalties. With nearly two hours of music, the "Fantasia" soundtrack album is the longest soundtrack album ever released of a Disney film.
The "Fantasia" soundtrack album contains all of the musical selections but none of the commentary from the film. After stereo LP's became possible, Buena Vista Records released a stereo version of the soundtrack album.
The original soundtrack was remastered and issued as a two-disc CD set by Walt Disney Records in 1991 and re-released in 2006. It eventually sold 100,000 copies. In 1982, Buena Vista Records also released a two-disc edition of the re-recorded soundtrack conducted by Irwin Kostal. This was also issued on CD by Walt Disney Records.
In 2015, the film's remastered soundtrack was released as the fifth volume in the "", in recognition of the film's 75th anniversary. The "Legacy" release contains both Leopold Stokowski and Irwin Kostal versions of the film's soundtrack as well as the never before released Stokowski recording of the deleted "Clair de Lune""" segment. Sterling Holloway's reading of the "Sorcerer's Apprentice""" and "Peter and the Wolf "(from "Make Mine Music") are also included as bonus tracks.
Video.
"Fantasia" has received three home video releases. The first, featuring the 1990 restored theatrical version, was released on VHS and laser disc on November 1, 1991, as part of the "Walt Disney Classics" line. The 50-day release prompted 9.25 million advance orders for cassettes and a record 200,000 for discs, doubling the figure of the previous record. The "Deluxe Edition" package included the film, a "making of" feature, a commemorative lithograph, a 16-page booklet, a two-disc soundtrack of the Stokowski score and a certificate of authenticity signed by Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt. "Fantasia" became the biggest-selling sell-through cassette of all time with 14.2 million copies being purchased. The record was surpassed by "Beauty and the Beast" in December 1992. This version was also released as a DVD in 2000, outside of the U.S. in the United Kingdom and other countries, again under the "Walt Disney Classics" banner.
In November 2000, "Fantasia" was released on video for the second time, this time along with "Fantasia 2000", on DVD with 5.1 surround sound. The films were issued both separately and in a three-disc set called "The Fantasia Anthology". A variety of bonus features were included in the bonus disc, "The Fantasia Legacy". This edition attempted to follow as closely as possible the runtime and format of the original roadshow version, and included additional restored live-action footage of Taylor and the orchestra, including the bookends to the film's intermission. In the 2000 and 2010 releases, Deems Taylor's voice has been overdubbed throughout by Corey Burton because most of the audio tracks to Taylor's restored scenes have been lost.
Both films were reissued again by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment in November 2010 separately, as a two-disc DVD/Blu-ray set and a combined DVD and Blu-ray four-disc (named the "Fantasia 2 Movie Collection") set that featured 1080p high-definition video and 7.1 surround sound. The 2010 version of "Fantasia" featured a new restoration by Reliance MediaWorks and a new sound restoration, but was editorially identical to the 2000 version. This also marked the first time the roadshow version was released in Europe. "Fantasia" was withdrawn from release and returned to the "Disney Vault" moratorium on April 30, 2011.
Reception.
Critical response.
Early criticism
"Fantasia" garnered significant critical acclaim at the time of release and was seen by some critics as a masterpiece. The West Coast premiere at the Carthay Circle Theatre was a grand affair, attracting some 5000 people, including Shirley Temple, Cecil B. DeMille, Forrest Tucker, James Cagney, Robert Montgomery, James Murphy, Edgar Bergen, and many other notables in the film industry. Among those at the film's premiere was film critic Edwin Schallert of the "Los Angeles Times" who considered the film to be a magnificent achievement in film which would go down in film history as a landmark film, noting the rapturous applause the film received by the audience during the various interludes. He stated that "Fantasia" was "caviar to the general, ambrosia and nectar for the intelligentsia" and considered the film to be "courageous beyond belief". Music critic of the newspaper, Isabel Morse Jones, was highly praising of the soundtrack to the film, believing it to be a "dream of a symphony concert", an "enormously varied concert of pictorial ideas, of abstract music by acknowledged composers, of performers Leopold Stokowski and orchestra players of Hollywood and Philadelphia, and, for the vast majority, new and wonderful sound effects". Bosley Crowther of "The New York Times", also at the premiere, noted that "motion-picture history was made last night ... "Fantasia" dumps conventional formulas overboard and reveals the scope of films for imaginative excursion ... "Fantasia" ... is simply terrific." Peyton Boswell, an editor at "Art Digest", called it "an aesthetic experience never to be forgotten". "Time" magazine described the premiere as "stranger and more wonderful than any of Hollywood's" and the experience of Fantasound "as if the hearer were in the midst of the music. As the music sweeps to a climax, it froths over the proscenium arch, boils into the rear of the theatre, all but prances up and down the aisles." "Dance Magazine" devoted its lead story to the film, saying that "the most extraordinary thing about "Fantasia" is, to a dancer or balletomane, not the miraculous musical recording, the range of color, or the fountainous integrity of the Disney collaborators, but quite simply the perfection of its dancing." "Variety" also hailed "Fantasia", calling it "a successful experiment to lift the relationship from the plane of popular, mass entertainment to the higher strata of appeal to lovers of classical music." "The Chicago Tribune" assigned three writers to cover the film's Chicago premiere: society columnist Harriet Pribble; film critic Mae Tinee; and music critic Edward Barry. Pribble left amazed at the "brilliantly-attired audience", while Tinee felt the film was "beautiful ... but it is also bewildering. It is stupendous. It is colossal. It is an overwhelmingly ambitious orgy of color, sound, and imagination. " Barry was pleased with the "program of good music well performed ... and beautifully recorded" and felt "pleasantly distracted" from the music to what was shown on the screen. In a breakdown of reviews from both film and music critics, Disney author Paul Anderson found 33% to be "very positive", 22% both "positive" and "positive and negative", and 11% negative.
Those who adopted a more negative view at the time of the film's release came mostly from the classical music community. Many took fault with Stokowski's rearrangements and abridgements of the music. Igor Stravinsky, the only living composer whose music was featured in the film, expressed displeasure at how in Stokowski's arrangement of "The Rite of Spring", “the order of the pieces had been shuffled, and the most difficult of them eliminated," and criticized the orchestra's performance, observing that the simplification of the score "did not save the musical performance, which was execrable." Other composers and music critics leveled criticism at the premise of the film itself, arguing that presenting classical music with visual images would rob the musical pieces of their integrity. Composer and music critic Virgil Thomson praised Fantasound which he thought offered "good transmission of music", but disliked the "musical taste" of Stokowski, with exception to "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" and "The Rite of Spring". Olin Downes of "The New York Times" too hailed the quality of sound that Fantasound presented, but said, "much of "Fantasia" distracted from or directly injured the scores." Film critic Pauline Kael dismissed parts of "Fantasia" as "grotesquely kitschy". Some parents resisted paying the higher roadshow prices for their children, and several complained that the "Night on Bald Mountain" segment had frightened them. There were also a few negative reactions that were more political in nature, especially since the film's release happened at a time when Nazi Germany reigned supreme in Europe. One review of the film in this manner, written by Dorothy Thompson for "The New York Herald Tribune" on November 25, 1940, was especially harsh. Thompson claimed that she "left the theater in a condition bordering on nervous breakdown," because the film was a "remarkable nightmare." Thompson went on to compare the film to rampant Nazism, which she described as "the abuse of power" and "the perverted betrayal of the best instincts." Thompson also claimed that the film depicted nature as being "titanic" while man was only "a moving lichen on the stone of time." She concluded that the film was "cruel", "brutal and brutalizing", and a negative "caricature of the Decline of the West". In fact, Thompson claimed that she was so distraught by the film that she even walked out of it before she saw the two last segments, "Night on Bald Mountain" and "Ave Maria", because she did not want to be subject to any more of the film's "brutalization".
Later criticism
"Fantasia" holds a 96% "fresh" rating based on a sample of 50 reviews, with an average score of 8.6 out of 10 on Rotten Tomatoes, a website which aggregates film reviews. Its consensus—"A landmark in animation and a huge influence on the medium of music video, Disney's "Fantasia" is a relentlessly inventive blend of the classics with phantasmagorical images". "TV Guide" awarded the film four stars, calling it "the most ambitious animated feature ever to come out of the Disney studios", noting how the film "integrates famous works of classical music with wildly uneven but extraordinarily imaginative visuals that run the gamut from dancing hippos to the purely abstract". Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" rated the film four stars out of four, and noted that throughout "Fantasia", "Disney pushes the edges of the envelope". However, "Empire" magazine only rated it 2 stars out of 5 (poor), concluding "this is a very patchy affair - while some of the animated pieces work, others come across as downright insane". Remarks have also been made about "Fantasia" not being a children's film. Mark I. Pinksy considers "Fantasia" to be one of the more problematic of Disney's animated features in that it was intended as much as for adults as children and not what people had come to expect.
Awards and honors.
"Fantasia" was ranked fifth at the 1940 National Board of Review Awards in the category. Disney and Stokowski won a Special Award for the film at the 1940 New York Film Critics Circle Awards. "Fantasia" was the subject of two Academy Honorary Awards on February 26, 1942—one for Disney, William Garity, John N. A. Hawkins, and the RCA Manufacturing Company for their "outstanding contribution to the advancement of the use of sound in motion pictures through the production of "Fantasia"", and the other to Stokowski "and his associates for their unique achievement in the creation of a new form of visualized music in Walt Disney's production "Fantasia", thereby widening the scope of the motion picture as entertainment and as an art form".
In 1990, "Fantasia" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". On the 100th anniversary of cinema in 1995, the Vatican included "Fantasia" in its list of 45 "great films" made under the Art category; the others being Religion and Values.
"Fantasia" is featured in three lists that rank the greatest American films as determined by the American Film Institute. The film ranked number 58 in 100 Years... 100 Movies in 1998 before it was dropped from its ranking in the 10th Anniversary revision in 2007, though it was nominated for inclusion. The 10 Top 10 list formed in 2008 placed "Fantasia" fifth under Animation.
Controversies.
In the late 1960s, four shots from "The Pastoral Symphony" were removed that depicted two characters in a racially stereotyped manner. A black centaurette called Sunflower was depicted polishing the hooves of a white centaurette, and a second named Otika appeared briefly during the procession scenes with Bacchus and his followers. According to Disney archivist David Smith, the sequence was aired uncut on television in 1963 before the edits were made for the film's 1969 theatrical reissue. John Carnochan, the editor responsible for the change in the 1991 video release, said: "It's sort of appalling to me that these stereotypes were ever put in". Film critic Roger Ebert commented on the edit: "While the original film should, of course, be preserved for historical purposes, there is no need for the general release version to perpetrate racist stereotypes in a film designed primarily for children." The edits have been in place in all subsequent theatrical and home video reissues.
In May 1992, the Philadelphia Orchestra Association filed a lawsuit against The Walt Disney Company and Buena Vista Home Video. The orchestra maintained that as a co-creator of "Fantasia", the group was entitled to half of the estimated $120 million in profits from video and laser disc sales. The orchestra dropped its case in 1994 when the two parties reached an undisclosed settlement out of court. British music publisher Boosey & Hawkes filed a further lawsuit in 1993, contending that Disney did not have the rights to distribute "The Rite of Spring" in the 1991 video releases because the permission granted to Disney by Stravinsky in 1940 was only in the context of a film to be shown in theaters. The United States district court backed Boosey & Hawkes's case in 1996, but the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the ruling in 1998, stating that Disney's original "license for motion picture rights extends to video format distribution".
Additional material.
Disney had wanted "Fantasia" to be an ongoing project, with a new edition being released every few years. His plan was to substitute one of the original segments with a new one as it was completed, so audiences would always see a new version of the film. From January to August 1941, story material was developed based on additional musical works, including "Ride of the Valkyries" by Richard Wagner, "The Swan of Tuonela" by Jean Sibelius, "Invitation to the Dance" by Carl Maria von Weber, and "Flight of the Bumblebee" by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, which was later adapted into the "Bumble Boogie" segment in "Melody Time" (1948). There was also consideration for a segment inspired by the Polka and Fugue from "Schwanda the Bagpiper" by Jaromír Weinberger. The film's disappointing initial box office performance and the USA's entry into World War II brought an end to these plans. Deems Taylor prepared introductions for "The Firebird" by Stravinsky, "La Mer" by Claude Debussy, "Adventures in a Perambulator" by John Alden Carpenter, "Don Quixote" by Richard Strauss, and "Pictures at an Exhibition" by Mussorgsky "to have them for the future in case we decided to make any one of them".
Another segment, Debussy's "Clair de lune", was developed as part of the film's original program. After being completely animated, it was cut out of the final film to shorten its lengthy running time. The animation depicted two egrets flying through the Florida Everglades on a moonlit night. The sequence was later edited and re-scored for the "Blue Bayou" segment in "Make Mine Music" (1946). In 1992, a workprint of the original was discovered and "Clair de Lune" was restored, complete with the original soundtrack of Stokowski with the Philadelphia Orchestra. It was included as a bonus feature in "The Fantasia Anthology" DVD in 2000.
Legacy.
Sequel.
In 1980, the "Los Angeles Times" reported that animators Wolfgang Reitherman and Mel Shaw had begun work on "Musicana", "an ambitious concept mixing jazz, classical music, myths, modern art and more, following the old "Fantasia" format". Animation historian Charles Solomon wrote that development took place between 1982 and 1983, which combined "ethnic tales from around the world with the music of the various countries". Proposed segments for the film included a battle between an ice god and a sun goddess set to "Finlandia" by Sibelius, one set in the Andes to the songs of Yma Sumac, and another featuring caricatures of Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald. The project was shelved in favor of "Mickey's Christmas Carol".
Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt, co-produced "Fantasia 2000" which entered production in 1990 and features seven new segments performed by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra with conductor James Levine. "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" is the only segment retained from the original film. "Fantasia 2000" premiered at Carnegie Hall on December 17, 1999 as part of a five-city live concert tour, followed by a four-month engagement in IMAX cinemas and a wide release in regular theatres, in 2000.
Early development for a third film began in 2002, with a working title of "Fantasia 2006". Plans were made to include "The Little Matchgirl" by Roger Allers and "One by One" by Pixote Hunt in the film before the project was shelved in 2004, with the proposed segments released as individual short films.
Parodies and spin-offs.
"Fantasia" is parodied in "A Corny Concerto", a Warner Bros. cartoon from 1943 of the "Merrie Melodies" series. The short features Elmer Fudd in the role of Taylor, wearing his styled eyeglasses, who introduces two segments set to pieces by Johann Strauss ("Tales from the Vienna Woods" and the "Blue Danube Waltz", the former featuring Porky and Bugs and the latter featuring Daffy). In 1976, Italian animator Bruno Bozzetto produced "Allegro Non Troppo", a feature-length parody of "Fantasia". Jerry Bruckheimer used the story of "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" as a basis for his eponymous fantasy-adventure film in 2010. Disney are developing the "Night on Bald Mountain" sequence from the film with Matt Sazama and Burk Sharpless writing and executive produce the live action film.
The animated television series "The Simpsons" references "Fantasia" in a few episodes. Matt Groening, the creator of the franchise, expressed a wish to make a parody film named "Simpstasia"; it was never produced, partly because it would have been too difficult to write a feature-length script. In "Treehouse of Horror IV", director David Silverman had admired the animation in "Night on Bald Mountain", and made the first appearance of Devil Flanders resemble Chernabog. The episode "Itchy & Scratchy Land" references "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" in a snippet titled "Scratchtasia", which features the music and several shots parodying it exactly.
In 2014, BBC Music created a film similar to "Fantasia" called "Ten Pieces", intended to introduce children to classical music. Several pieces featured in the "Fantasia" films are included along with an original body music piece called "Connect It".
In June 2015 plans were announced to adapt the "Night on Bald Mountain" sequence into a live-action film.
Theme parks.
From 2001 to 2015, the Sorcerer's Hat was the icon of Disney's Hollywood Studios, one of the four theme parks located at Walt Disney World Resort. The structure was of the magic hat from "The Sorcerer's Apprentice". Also located at the resort is Fantasia Gardens, a miniature golf course that integrates characters and objects from the film in each hole. The fireworks and water show "Fantasmic!" features scenes from "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" and other "Fantasia" segments on water projection screens, and involves the plot of Mickey as the apprentice doing magic whilst also battling the Disney Villains.
For the 20th anniversary of Disneyland Paris, Mickey was depicted in a special version of his Sorcerer's Apprentice outfit with his friends wearing similar outfits.
Video games.
In 1983, Atari released a game called "Sorcerer's Apprentice" for the Atari 2600, based on that segment of "Fantasia". The player, as Mickey Mouse, must collect falling stars and comets which will prevent the marching brooms from flooding Yen Sid's cavern.
In 1991, a side-scrolling "Fantasia" video game developed by Infogrames was released for the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis system. The player controls Mickey Mouse, who must find missing musical notes scattered across four elemental worlds based upon the film's segments.
There are several film reel levels based on some of the movie's segments such as "Sorcerer's Apprentice" and "Night on Bald Mountain" that appear in the "Epic Mickey" games. Yen Sid and Chernabog also make cameo appearances in the games (Yen Sid the sorcerer from "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" narrates the openings and endings of the two games and served as the creator of the Wasteland. Chernabog the demon from the "Night on Bald Mountain/Ave Maria" segment appears as a painting in the first game and appears in the Night on Bald Mountain film reel levels in the second).
The Disney/Square Enix crossover game series "Kingdom Hearts" features Chernabog as a boss in the first installment. The "Night on Bald Mountain" piece is played during the fight. Yen Sid appears frequently in the series beginning with "Kingdom Hearts II", voiced in English by Corey Burton. Symphony of Sorcery, a world based on the movie, appears in "". Like the Timeless River world in "Kingdom Hearts II", it is featured as a period of Mickey Mouse's past.
"", a music game, was developed by Harmonix in association with Disney Interactive for the Xbox 360 and Xbox One consoles. The game utilizes the Kinect device to put players in control of music in a manner similar to Harmonix' previous rhythm games, affecting the virtual environment and interactive objects within it. The game features licensed contemporary rock music such as Queen and Bruno Mars.
Mickey, in his Sorcerer's Apprentice guise, appears as a playable character in "Disney Infinity".
Concert.
A live concert presentation of the film named "Disney Fantasia: Live in Concert", showcases various segments from both "Fantasia" and "Fantasia 2000". The concert version features a live symphony orchestra and piano soloist accompanying projected high definition video segments. As of 2014, the "Fantasia" concert is touring throughout the world.
Television.
Several elements from the film appear in television series "Once Upon a Time". The hat from "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" appears in the fourth season episode "A tale of Two Sisters". As the series progressed, the hat was shown to have the ability to absorb others, and those it absorbed would appear as a star on the hat. The Sorcerer's Apprentice himself makes an appearance, where he is an old man who guards the hat in the Enchanted Forest.
Chernabog from "Night On Bald Mountain" also makes an appearance in the episode "Darkness on the Edge of Town,".
Credits.
Musical score conducted by Leopold Stokowski. Performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra, except as noted.

</doc>
<doc id="73462" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73462" title="Amadeo I of Spain">
Amadeo I of Spain

Amadeo I (Italian Amedeo, sometimes anglicized as Amadeus) (30 May 1845 – 18 January 1890) was the only King of Spain from the House of Savoy. He was the second son of King Vittorio Emanuele II of Italy and was known for most of his life as the Duke of Aosta, but reigned briefly as King of Spain from 1870 to 1873.
He was elected by the Cortes as Spain's monarch in 1870, following the deposition of Isabella II, and sworn in the following year. Amadeo's reign was fraught with growing republicanism, Carlist rebellions in the north, and the Cuban independence movement. He abdicated and returned to Italy in 1873, and the First Spanish Republic was declared as a result.
Granted the hereditary title Duke of Aosta in the year of his birth, he founded the Aosta branch of Italy's royal House of Savoy, which is junior in agnatic descent to the branch descended from King Umberto I that reigned in Italy until 1946, but senior to the branch of the Dukes of Genoa.
Early life and first marriage.
Prince Amedeo of Savoy was born in Turin (then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia). He was the second son of King Vittorio Emanuele II (King of Piedmont, Savoy, Sardinia and, later, first King of Italy) and of Archduchess Adelaide of Austria. He was styled the Duke of Aosta from birth.
In 1867 his father yielded to the entreaties of parliamentary deputy Francisco Cassins, and on 30 May of that year, Amedeo was married to Donna Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo. The King initially opposed the match on the grounds that her family was of insufficient rank, as well as his hopes for his son's marriage to a German princess.
Despite her princely title, Donna Maria Vittoria was not of royal birth, belonging rather to the Piedmontese nobility. She was, however, the sole heiress of her father's vast fortune, which subsequent Dukes of Aosta inherited, thereby obtaining wealth independent of their dynastic appanage and allowances from Italy's kings. Maria Vittoria's mother, Louise de Mérode, granddaughter of the Prince de Rubempré and of the Princess van Grimberghe, belonged to one of Belgium's premier noble houses, and had married the "Principe della Cisterna" in 1846 in a double wedding with her younger sister Antoinette, who married Charles III, the reigning Prince of Monaco.
In March 1870, the Duchess appealed to the King to remonstrate with his son for marital infidelities that caused her hurt and embarrassment. But the King wrote in reply that, while understanding her feelings, he considered that she had no right to dictate her husband's behaviour and that her jealousy was unbecoming.
The wedding day of Prince Amedeo and Donna Maria Vittoria was marred by the death of a stationmaster who was crushed under the wheels of the honeymoon train.
King of Spain.
After the Spanish revolution deposed Isabella II, the new "Cortes" decided to reinstate the monarchy under a new dynasty. The Duke of Aosta was elected King as Amadeus (Amadeo) on 16 November 1870. He swore to uphold the constitution in Madrid on 2 January 1871.
The election of the new King coincided with the assassination of General Marqués de los Castillejos, his main backer. After that, Amadeo had to deal with difficult situations, with unstable Spanish politics, republican conspiracies, Carlist uprisings, separatism in Cuba, same-party disputes, fugitive governments and assassination attempts.
He could count on the support of only the progressive party, whose leaders were trading off in the government thanks to parliamentary majority and electoral fraud. The progressives divided into monarchists and constitutionalists, which made the instability worse, and in 1872 a violent outburst of interparty conflicts hit a peak. There was a Carlist uprising in the Basque and Catalan regions, and after that, republican uprisings happened in cities across the country. The artillery corps of the army went on strike, and the government instructed the King to discipline them.
With the possibility of reigning without popular support, Amadeus issued an order against the artillery corps and then immediately abdicated from the Spanish throne on 11 February 1873. At ten o'clock that same night, Spain was proclaimed a republic, at which time Amadeo made an appearance before the Cortes, proclaiming the Spanish people ungovernable.
Post-abdication and legacy.
Completely disgusted, the ex-monarch left Spain and returned to Italy, where he resumed the title of Duke of Aosta. The First Spanish Republic lasted less than one year, and in November 1874 Alfonso XII, the son of Isabella II, was proclaimed King, with Antonio Cánovas del Castillo, Spanish intermittent prime minister from 1873 until his assassination in 1897, briefly serving as regent.
After the death of his first wife, Amadeo married his French niece, Princess Maria Letizia Bonaparte (20 November 1866 – 25 October 1926), daughter of his sister Maria Clotilde and of Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte, a nephew of Napoleon I. They had one child, Umberto (1889–1918), who died of the flu during the First World War.
Amadeo remained in Turin, Italy until his death on 18 January 1890, less than two years after marrying his second wife. His friend Puccini composed the famous elegy for string quartet "Crisantemi" in his memory.
Lake Amadeus in central Australia is named after him, as is the Philippine municipality of Amadeo, Cavite.
Issue.
By Maria Vittoria dal Pozzo:
By Maria Letizia Bonaparte:
Titles, styles, honours.
Full title as King of Spain.
His Majesty Amadeo I, By the Grace of God and will of the nation, King of Spain, Duke of Aosta.

</doc>
<doc id="73463" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73463" title="Fatty's Tintype Tangle">
Fatty's Tintype Tangle

"Fatty's Tintype Tangle" is a 1915 comedy short film. A man, tired of his mother-in-law's henpecking, leaves home in anger and sits on a park bench, where a photographer takes a picture of him sitting next to a married woman, whose husband is not pleased.
The movie stars Roscoe 'Fatty' Arbuckle, Louise Fazenda, Edgar Kennedy, Minta Durfee and Frank Hayes. The film was directed by Arbuckle and features a spectacular sequence of Arbuckle walking on power lines.
In 1995, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

</doc>
<doc id="73467" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73467" title="Five Easy Pieces">
Five Easy Pieces

Five Easy Pieces is a 1970 American drama film written by Carole Eastman (as Adrien Joyce) and Bob Rafelson, and directed by Rafelson. The film stars Jack Nicholson, with Karen Black, Susan Anspach, Ralph Waite, and Sally Struthers in supporting roles.
The film tells the story of a surly oil rig worker, Bobby Dupea, whose seemingly rootless, blue-collar existence belies his privileged youth as a piano prodigy. When Bobby learns that his father is dying, he goes home to see him, bringing along his girlfriend, Rayette (Black), a waitress. Nicholson and Black were nominated for Academy Awards for their performances.
The film was selected to be preserved by the Library of Congress in the National Film Registry in 2000.
Plot.
Bobby Dupea (Jack Nicholson) works in a California oil field (shot in and around the city of Taft in the San Joaquin Valley) with his friend Elton (Billy "Green" Bush), who has a wife and baby son. Most of Bobby's time is spent with his waitress girlfriend, Rayette (Karen Black), who has dreams of singing country music, or in the company of Elton, with whom he bowls, gets drunk, and has sex with other women. Bobby has evidently not told Elton that he is a former classical pianist who comes from an eccentric family of musicians.
When Rayette becomes pregnant and Elton is arrested for having robbed a gas station a year earlier, Bobby quits his job and leaves for Los Angeles where his sister, Partita (Lois Smith), also a pianist, is making a recording. Partita informs him that their father, from whom Bobby is estranged, has suffered two strokes. She urges Bobby to return to the family home in Washington state, to visit their father.
As Rayette has threatened to kill herself if Bobby leaves her, he reluctantly asks her along. Driving north, they pick up two women headed for Alaska, one of whom is obsessed about "filth". The four of them are thrown out of a restaurant when Bobby gets into an argument with a waitress who refuses to accommodate his special order. Reaching his destination, Bobby, embarrassed by Rayette's lack of polish, registers her in a motel before proceeding to his family home on an island in Puget Sound.
He finds Partita giving their father a haircut, but the old man seems completely oblivious to him. At dinner, Bobby meets Catherine Van Oost (Susan Anspach), a young pianist engaged to his brother, Carl (Ralph Waite), a violinist. Despite personality differences, Catherine and Robert, the name she calls Bobby, become attracted and make love in her room.
Rayette runs out of money at the motel and comes to the Dupea estate unannounced. Her presence creates an awkward situation, but when Samia, a pompous family friend, ridicules Rayette, Bobby strongly defends her. Storming from the room in search of Catherine, he discovers his father's male nurse giving Partita a massage. Now more agitated, he picks a senseless fight and is quickly knocked to the floor.
Bobby tries to persuade Catherine to go away with him, but she declines, believing he does not love himself, or indeed anything at all. After trying to talk to his unresponsive father, Bobby leaves with Rayette, who makes a playful sexual advance that he angrily rejects. When Rayette goes in for some coffee at a gas station, he gives her his wallet and then abandons her, hitching a ride on a truck headed north.
Recital music.
The five classical piano pieces played in the film and referenced in the title are:
Reception.
Box Office.
By 1976 the film had earned $8.9 million in rentals in North America.
Critical.
The film opened to positive reviews; it holds an 86% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 44 reviews.
Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four:
The title of "Five Easy Pieces" refers not to the women its hero makes along the road, for there are only three, but to a book of piano exercises he owned as a child. The film, one of the best American films, is about the distance between that boy, practicing to become a concert pianist, and the need he feels twenty years later to disguise himself as an oil-field rigger. When we sense the boy, tormented and insecure, trapped inside the adult man, "Five Easy Pieces" becomes a masterpiece of heartbreaking intensity...The movie is joyously alive to the road life of its hero. We follow him through bars and bowling alleys, motels and mobile homes, and we find him rebelling against lower-middle-class values even as he embraces them. In one magical scene, he leaps from his car in a traffic jam and starts playing the piano on the truck in front of him; the scene sounds forced, described this way, but Rafelson and Nicholson never force anything, and never have to. Robert Eroica Dupea is one of the most unforgettable characters in American movies.
He later added it to his "Great Movies" list.
Awards.
The film received Academy Award nominations for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Jack Nicholson), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Karen Black), Best Picture, and Best Original Screenplay. Nicholson lost to George C. Scott, but was nominated several times before getting the Award for the 1975 film "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest".
Home media.
According to "Variety", the film earned $1.2 million in North American rentals in 1970.
On November 16, 1999, Columbia TriStar Home Video released the film on two-sided DVD-Video, featuring both fullscreen (4:3) and widescreen formats.
Grover Crisp of Sony Pictures conducted a 4K restoration of the film, and it was screening theatrically in DCP by 2012.
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray by The Criterion Collection in November 2010 as part of the box set, "America Lost and Found: The BBS Story." It includes audio commentary featuring director Bob Rafelson and interior designer Toby Rafelson (originally recorded for a Criterion laserdisc), "Soul Searching in “Five Easy Pieces,”" a 2009 video piece with Rafelson, "BBStory", a 2009 documentary about the BBS era, with Rafelson, actors Jack Nicholson, Karen Black, and Ellen Burstyn, and directors Peter Bogdanovich and Henry Jaglom, among others, and audio excerpts from a 1976 AFI interview with Rafelson.
On June 30, 2015, "Five Easy Pieces" was released as a stand-alone DVD and Blu-ray by the Criterion Collection.

</doc>
<doc id="73469" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73469" title="Yucca">
Yucca

Yucca is a genus of perennial shrubs and trees in the family Asparagaceae, subfamily Agavoideae. Its 40-50 species are notable for their rosettes of evergreen, tough, sword-shaped leaves and large terminal panicles of white or whitish flowers. They are native to the hot and dry (arid) parts of the Americas and the Caribbean. Early reports of the species were confused with the cassava ("Manihot esculenta"). Consequently, Linnaeus mistakenly derived the generic name from the Taíno word for the latter, "yuca" (spelled with a single "c"). It is commonly found growing in rural graveyards and when in bloom the cluster of (usually pale) flowers on a thin stalk appear as floating apparitions.
Distribution.
The natural distribution range of the genus "Yucca" (49 species and 24 subspecies) covers a vast area of North America, Central America, and South America. From Baja California in the west, northwards into the southwestern United States, through the drier central states as far north as Alberta in Canada ("Yucca glauca" ssp. "albertana"). Yucca is also native to the lowlands and dry beach scrub of the Gulf and South Atlantic states from coastal Texas to easternmost Virginia. To the south, the genus is represented throughout Mexico and extends into Guatemala ("Yucca guatemalensis"). Yuccas have adapted to an equally vast range of climatic and ecological conditions. They are to be found in rocky deserts and badlands, in prairies and grassland, in mountainous regions, in light woodland, in coastal sands ("Yucca filamentosa"), and even in subtropical and semitemperate zones, although these are generally arid to Semi-arid climate-semiarid.
Ecology.
Yuccas have a very specialized, mutualistic pollination system, being pollinated by yucca moths (family Prodoxidae); the insect purposefully transfers the pollen from the stamens of one plant to the stigma of another, and at the same time lays an egg in the flower; the moth larva then feeds on some of the developing seeds, always leaving enough seed to perpetuate the species. Certain species of the yucca moth have evolved antagonistic features against the plant and do not assist in the plants pollination efforts while continuing to lay their eggs in the plant for protection. Yucca species are the host plants for the caterpillars of the yucca giant-skipper ("Megathymus yuccae"), ursine giant-skipper ("Megathymus ursus"), and Strecker's giant-skipper ("Megathymus streckeri").
Adaptations.
Species of yucca have adapted to a wide variety of climates in mountains, coastal sand, grasslands and prairies as well as rocky badlands and deserts. Most species of yucca have thick, waxy skins to prevent loss of water through evaporation. They frequently store water in thick roots. Some yuccas store water in thick, fleshy leaves. Some desert plants have an oily coating on their leaves or pads that traps moisture, thereby reducing water loss. Some species drop their leaves during drought to prevent the loss of water through transpiration. Dead leaves of yucca collecting against the trunk of the trees help protect it from the sun. The channeled leaves of a yucca direct dew and rainfall water to their roots. Yuccas are said to be "fire adapted"; that is, they grow and spread vigorously after wildfires.
Uses.
Yuccas are widely grown as ornamental plants in gardens. Many species also bear edible parts, including fruits, seeds, flowers, flowering stems, and more rarely roots. References to yucca root as food often stem from confusion with the similarly pronounced, but botanically unrelated, yuca, also called cassava or manioc ("Manihot esculenta"). Roots of soaptree yucca ("Yucca elata") are high in saponins and are used as a shampoo in Native American rituals. Dried yucca leaves and trunk fibers have a low ignition temperature, making the plant desirable for use in starting fires via friction.
In rural Appalachian areas, species such as "Yucca filamentosa" are referred to as "meat hangers". The tough, fibrous leaves with their sharp-spined tips were used to puncture meat and knotted to form a loop with which to hang meat for salt curing or in smoke houses.
Cultivation.
Yuccas are widely grown as architectural plants providing a dramatic accent to landscape design. They tolerate a range of conditions, but are best grown in full sun in subtropical or mild temperate areas. In gardening centres and horticultural catalogues they are usually grouped with other architectural plants such as cordylines and phormiums.
Joshua trees ("Yucca brevifolia") are protected by law in some states. A permit is needed for wild collection. As a landscape plant, they can be killed by excessive water during their summer dormant phase, so are avoided by landscape contractors.
Several species of yucca can be grown outdoors in mild temperate climates where they are protected from frost. These include:-
Symbolism.
The "yucca flower" is the state flower of New Mexico. No species name is given in the citation.
Species.
, the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families recognizes 49 species of "Yucca" and a number of hybrids:
A number of other species previously classified in "Yucca" are now classified in the genera "Dasylirion", "Furcraea", "Hesperaloe", "Hesperoyucca", and "Nolina".
Cultivars.
In the years from 1897 to 1907, Carl Ludwig Sprenger created and named 122 "Yucca" hybrids.

</doc>
<doc id="73471" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73471" title="Flash Gordon (serial)">
Flash Gordon (serial)

Flash Gordon is a 1936 science fiction film serial. Shown in 13 installments, it was the first screen adventure for the comic-strip character Flash Gordon that was invented by Alex Raymond only two years earlier in 1934. It tells the story of Flash Gordon's first visit to the planet Mongo and his encounter with the evil Emperor Ming the Merciless. Buster Crabbe, Jean Rogers, Charles Middleton, Priscilla Lawson and Frank Shannon played the central roles. In 1996, "Flash Gordon" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
Production.
According to Harmon and Glut, "Flash Gordon" had a budget of over a million dollars. Stedman, however, writes that it was "reportedly" $350,000.
A lot of props and other elements were recycled from earlier Universal productions. The watchtower sets from "Frankenstein" (1931) appeared as several interiors within Ming's palace. The Egyptian statue from "The Mummy" (1932) became the idol of the Great God Tao. The laboratory set and a shot of the Moon rushing past Zarkov's returning rocket ship from space came from "The Invisible Ray" (1936). Zarkov's rocket ship and scenes of dancers swarming over a gigantic idol were reused from "Just Imagine" (1930). Ming's attack on Earth used footage from old silent newsreels. An entire dance segment from "The Midnight Sun" (1927) was used. and much laboratory equipment came from "Bride of Frankenstein" (1935). The music was recycled from several other films, notably "Bride of Frankenstein", "Bombay Mail", "The Black Cat" (both 1934), and "The Invisible Man" (1933).
Exterior shots, such as the crew from Earth's first steps on Mongo, were filmed at Bronson Canyon.
Crash Corrigan, who would later be the lead in other serials, wore a modified gorilla suit as the "Orangapoid".
"Flash Gordon" was intended to regain an adult audience for serials. It was shown in 'A' Theaters in large cities across the United States. Many newspapers, including some not carrying the Flash Gordon comic strip, contained half and three-quarter page feature stories in their entertainment pages with Alex Raymond drawings and stills from the serial.
Flash Gordon was the first outright science fiction serial, although earlier serials had contained science fiction elements such as gadgets. Six of the fourteen serials released within five years of Flash Gordon were science fiction.
The serial film was subsequently released as a 72-minute feature named "Rocket Ship". Alternate titles for this film include "Spaceship to the Unknown" and "Atomic Rocketship". The TV version was named "Space Soldiers".

</doc>
<doc id="73473" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73473" title="Footlight Parade">
Footlight Parade

Footlight Parade is a 1933 American Pre-Code musical film starring James Cagney, Joan Blondell, Ruby Keeler and Dick Powell and featuring Frank McHugh, Guy Kibbee, Hugh Herbert and Ruth Donnelly. The movie was written by Manuel Seff and James Seymour from a story by Robert Lord and Peter Milne, and directed by Lloyd Bacon, with musical numbers created and directed by Busby Berkeley. The film's songs were written by Harry Warren (music) and Al Dubin (lyrics) and Sammy Fain (music) and Irving Kahal (lyrics), and include "By a Waterfall", "Honeymoon Hotel", and "Shanghai Lil".
In 1992, "Footlight Parade" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
__TOC__
Plot.
Chester Kent (James Cagney) replaces his failing career as a director of Broadway musicals with a new one as the creator of musical numbers called "prologues", short live stage productions presented in movie theaters before the main feature is shown. He faces pressure from his business partners to constantly create a large number of marketable prologues to service theaters throughout the country, but his job is made harder by a rival who is stealing his ideas, probably with assistance from someone working inside his company. Kent is so overwhelmed with work that he doesn't realize that his secretary, Nan (Joan Blondell), has fallen in love with him, and is doing her best to protect him as well his interests.
Kent's business partners announce that they have a big deal pending with the Apolinaris theater circuit, but getting the contract depends on Kent impressing Mr. Apolinaris (Paul Porcasi) with three spectacular prologues, presented on the same night, one after another at three different theatres. Kent locks himself and his staff in the offices to prevent espionage leaks while they choreograph and rehearse the three production numbers. Kent then stages "Honeymoon Hotel", "By a Waterfall", featuring the famous 'Human Waterfall', and "Shanghai Lil", featuring Cagney and Ruby Keeler dancing together.
Cast.
Cast notes:
Production.
Cagney, a former song-and-dance man, actively campaigned the executives at Warner Bros. for the lead in "Footlight Parade", which became his first on-screen appearance as a dancer. Cagney had only fallen into his gangster persona when he and Edward Woods switched roles three days into the shooting of 1931's "The Public Enemy". That role catapulted Cagney into stardom and a series of gangster films, which throughout his career, Cagney found to be as much a straitjacket as a benefit.
Cagney's character, Chester Kent, was modeled after Chester Hale, a well-known impresario at the time, and the offices he worked in were based on the Sunset Boulevard offices of the prologue production company "Fanchon and Marco" in Los Angeles.
Although early casting reports had Stanley Smith playing the juvenile lead eventually played by Dick Powell, the film became the third pairing of Powell and Ruby Keeler after "42nd Street" (1933) and "Gold Diggers of 1933", the first two Warner Bros. Busby Berkeley musicals. Remarkably, considering the success of those two films, Berkeley was not the original choice to choreograph – Larry Ceballos was signed to direct the dance numbers, and sued Berkeley and the studio for $100,000 for breach of contract when he was not allowed to do so. Ceballos also claimed to have created a number later used in the Warner Bros. film "Wonder Bar", which was credited to Berkeley.
Dorothy Tennant was originally tapped to play Mrs. Gould instead of Ruth Donnelly. Other actors considered for various roles included Eugene Pallette, George Dobbs and Patricia Ellis.
"Footlight Parade" was shot at the Warner Bros. studio in Burbank, California, and cost an estimated $703,000 to make (or approximately $13 million in 2012 dollars). It premiered on September 30, 1933, and was released generally on October 21.
Pre-Code era.
The film was made during the Pre-Code era, and its humor is sometimes quite risqué, with multiple references to prostitution and suggestions of profanity largely unseen in studio films until the 1960s, when the Production Code collapsed. For example, Dick Powell's character is being "kept" by Mrs. Gould until he falls in love with another girl. Joan Blondell tells her roommate, who tries to steal Cagney away from her, that as long as there are sidewalks, the roommate will have a job. In the Shanghai Lil number, it is clear that Lil and all the other girls are prostitutes working the waterfront bars. One character in the film, played by actor Hugh Herbert acts as the censor for Kent's productions, constantly telling Kent certain parts of his production numbers have to be changed. His character is portrayed as buffoonish and comical, saying disagreeable lines to Kent such as "You must put brassieres on those dolls..." (referring to actual toy dolls) "...uh uh, you know Connecticut." This character foreshadows the coming Production Code, which was in full force less than a year later.

</doc>
<doc id="73475" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73475" title="Force of Evil">
Force of Evil

Force of Evil is a 1948 American film noir directed by Abraham Polonsky who had already achieved a name for himself as a scriptwriter, most notably for the gritty boxing film "Body and Soul" (1947). Like "Body and Soul", the film starred John Garfield. The film was adapted by Abraham Polonsky and Ira Wolfert from Wolfert's novel "Tucker's People." The film marked the first on screen acting role of Beau Bridges.
In 1994, "Force of Evil" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
Plot.
The drama tells of a lawyer, Joe Morse (Garfield), working for a powerful gangster, Tucker, who wishes to consolidate and control the numbers racket in New York. This means assuming control of the many smaller numbers rackets, one of which is run by Morse’s older brother Leo Morse (Thomas Gomez). The plot which unfolds is a terse, melodramatic thriller notable for realist location photography, almost poetic dialogue and frequent biblical allusions (Cain and Abel, Judas's betrayal, stigmata).
Reception.
According to MGM records the film earned $948,000 in the US and $217,000 overseas.
Critical response.
When the film was released, the staff at "Variety" magazine gave the film a mixed review:
Bosley Crowther, the film critic for "The New York Times", liked the film, and wrote, "But for all its unpleasant nature, it must be said that this film is a dynamic crime-and-punishment drama, brilliantly and broadly realized. Out of material and ideas that have been worked over time after time, so that they've long since become stale and hackneyed, it gathers suspense and dread, a genuine feeling of the bleakness of crime and a terrible sense of doom. And it catches in eloquent tatters of on-the-wing dialogue moving intimations of the pathos of hopeful lives gone wrong."
Over the years, "Force of Evil" has been recognized as a masterpiece of the film noir genre, powerful in its poetic images and language, by film critics and historians such as William S. Pechter and Andrew Dickos. Its influence has been acknowledged many times by Martin Scorsese in the making of his crime dramas.
Accolades.
American Film Institute Lists

</doc>
<doc id="73478" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73478" title="The Forgotten Frontier">
The Forgotten Frontier

The Forgotten Frontier (1931) is a documentary film about the Frontier Nursing Service, nurses on horseback, who traveled the back roads of the Appalachian Mountains of eastern Kentucky. It was directed by Mary Marvin Breckinridge, and featured her cousin, Mary Breckinridge, who was a nurse-midwife and founded the Frontier Nursing Service. Also featured are the people of Leslie County, Kentucky, many of whom reenacted their stories.
The film was shot with a hand-cranked camera, often in extreme climate. Stills created during the film's production are available at the Library of Congress.
A soundtrack was added in the 1990s by the Library of Congress.
In 1996, this film has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant films".
Footage from the film was used in the 1984 documentary "Frontier Nursing Service".

</doc>
<doc id="73483" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73483" title="Frank Film">
Frank Film

Frank Film is a 1973 American animated short film. It is a compilation of images co-creator Frank Mouris had collected from magazines interwoven with two narrations, one giving a mostly linear autobiography and the other stating words having to do with the images, the story the first voice is relating, or neither. Frank made the film with Caroline Mouris.
The soundtrack was created by Tony Schwartz.
The movie won the 1974 Academy Award for Best Short Subject, Animated Films. It was also included in the Animation Show of Shows. In 1996, "Frank Film" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". The film is also featured in the 1985 movie titled "Explorers". "Frank Film" is included on the 2007 DVD "five by two: five animated shorts by frank & caroline mouris".

</doc>
<doc id="73488" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73488" title="Frankenstein (1931 film)">
Frankenstein (1931 film)

Frankenstein is a 1931 American Pre-Code horror monster film from Universal Pictures directed by James Whale and adapted from the play by Peggy Webling (which in turn is based on the novel of the same name by Mary Shelley), about a scientist and his assistant who dig up corpses to build a monster, but his assistant accidentally gives the monster a murderer's brain.
The film stars Colin Clive, Mae Clarke, John Boles and Boris Karloff and features Dwight Frye and Edward van Sloan. The Webling play was adapted by John L. Balderston and the screenplay written by Francis Edward Faragoh and Garrett Fort with uncredited contributions from Robert Florey and John Russell. The make-up artist was Jack Pierce. A hit with both audiences and critics, the film was followed by multiple sequels and has become an iconic horror film.
In 1991, the Library of Congress selected "Frankenstein" for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
Plot.
In a European village Henry Frankenstein, a young scientist, and his assistant Fritz, a hunchback, piece together a human body, the parts of which have been collected from various sources. Frankenstein desires to create human life through electrical devices which he has perfected.
Elizabeth, his fiancée, is worried over his peculiar actions. She cannot understand why he secludes himself in an abandoned watch tower, which he has equipped as a laboratory, refusing to see anyone. She and her friend, Victor Moritz, go to Dr. Waldman, his old medical professor, and ask Waldman's help in reclaiming the young scientist from his experiments. Waldman tells them that Frankenstein has been working on creating life. Elizabeth, intent on rescuing Frankenstein, arrives just as Henry is making his final tests. He tells them to watch, claiming to have discovered the ray that brought life into the world. They watch Frankenstein and the hunchback as they raise the dead creature on an operating table, high into the room, toward an opening at the top of the laboratory. Then a terrific crash of thunder, the crackling of Frankenstein's electric machines, and the hand of Frankenstein's monster begins to move, prompting Frankenstein to shout 'It's alive!'.
Through the incompetence of Fritz, a criminal brain was secured for Frankenstein's experiments instead of the desired normal one. The manufactured monster, despite its grotesque form, initially appears to be a simple, innocent creation. Frankenstein welcomes it into his laboratory and asks his creation to sit, which it does. He then opens up the roof, causing the monster to reach out towards the sunlight. Fritz enters with a flaming torch, which frightens the monster. Its fright is mistaken by Frankenstein and Waldman as an attempt to attack them, and it is chained in the dungeon. Thinking that it is not fit for society and will wreak havoc at any chance, they leave the monster locked up, where Fritz antagonizes it with a torch. As Henry and Waldman consider the monster's fate, they hear a shriek from the dungeon. Frankenstein and Waldman find the monster has strangled Fritz. The monster lunges at the two but they escape, locking the monster inside. Realizing that the creature must be destroyed, Henry prepares an injection of a powerful drug and the two conspire to release the monster and inject it as it attacks. When the door is unlocked the creature lunges at Frankenstein as Waldman injects the drug into the creature's back. The monster falls to the floor unconscious.
Henry leaves to prepare for his wedding while Waldman examines the creature. As he is preparing to dissect it, the creature awakens and strangles him. It escapes from the tower and wanders through the landscape. It has a short encounter with a farmer's young daughter, Maria, who asks him to play a game with her in which they toss flowers into a lake and watch them float. The monster enjoys the game, but when they run out of flowers the monster thinks Maria will float as well, so he throws her into the lake and she drowns. Upset by this outcome, the monster runs away.
With preparations for the wedding completed, Frankenstein is serenely happy with Elizabeth. They are to marry as soon as Waldman arrives. Victor rushes in, saying that the Doctor has been found strangled in his operating room. Frankenstein suspects the monster. A chilling scream convinces him that the monster is in the house. When the searchers arrive, they find Elizabeth unconscious on the bed. The monster has escaped.
Maria's father arrives, carrying his daughter's body. He says she was murdered, and a band of peasants search the country for the monster. They are split into three groups, Frankenstein leading one into the mountains. He becomes separated from the band and is discovered by the monster, who attacks him. The monster knocks Frankenstein unconscious and carries him off to an old mill. The peasants hear his cries and follow. They find the monster has climbed to the top, dragging Frankenstein with him. The monster hurls the scientist to the ground. His fall is broken by the vanes of the windmill, saving his life. Some of the villagers hurry him to his home while the others burn the mill to destroy the entrapped monster.
At Castle Frankenstein, Frankenstein's father, Baron Frankenstein celebrates the wedding of his recovered son with a toast to a future grandchild.
Background.
In 1930, Universal Studios had lost $2.2 million in revenues. Within 48 hours of its opening at New York's Roxy Theatre on February 12, 1931, "Dracula" starring Bela Lugosi had sold 50,000 tickets, building a momentum that culminated in a $700,000 profit, the largest of Universal's 1931 releases. As a result, head of production Carl Laemmle, Jr. announced immediate plans for more horror films.
Production.
"Frankenstein" begins with Edward Van Sloan stepping from behind a curtain and delivering a brief caution before the opening credits:
How do you do? Mr. Carl Laemmle feels it would be a little unkind to present this picture without just a friendly word of warning: We are about to unfold the story of Frankenstein, a man of science who sought to create a man after his own image without reckoning upon God. It is one of the strangest tales ever told. It deals with the two great mysteries of creation; life and death. I think it will thrill you. It may shock you. It might even" horrify "you. So, if any of you feel that you do not care to subject your nerves to such a strain, now's your chance to uh, well, ––we "warned" you!!
Immediately following his success in "Dracula", Bela Lugosi had hoped to play Dr. Frankenstein in Universal's original film concept, but the actor was expected by Carl Laemmle, Jr. to be the Monster (a common move for a contract player in a film studio at the time) to keep his famous name on the bill. After several disastrous make-up tests (said to resemble that of Paul Wegener in "The Golem"), the "Dracula" star left the project. Although this is often regarded as one of the worst decisions of Lugosi's career, in actuality, the part that Lugosi was offered was not the same character that Karloff eventually played. The character in the Florey script was simply a killing machine without a touch of human interest or pathos, reportedly causing Lugosi to complain, "I was a star in my country and I will not be a scarecrow over here!" Florey later wrote that "the Hungarian actor didn't show himself very enthusiastic for the role and didn't want to play it." However, the decision may not have been Lugosi's in "any" case, since recent evidence suggests that he was kicked off the project, along with director Robert Florey when the newly arrived James Whale asked for the property. Whale had been imported from England by the Laemmles and given a free hand as to his choice of projects at Universal. He was immediately attracted to "Frankenstein" and greatly revised the script and conceptualization of the project, which had troubled the management. Florey and Lugosi were given the "Murders in the Rue Morgue" film, as a consolation. Lugosi would later go on to play the monster in "Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man" a decade later, when his career was in decline (in the original shooting script the Monster spoke, cancelling Lugosi's initial objection to the part).
Actors who worked on the project were, or became familiar to, fans of the Universal horror films. These included Frederick Kerr as the old Baron Frankenstein, Henry's father; Lionel Belmore as Herr Vogel, the Bürgermeister; Marilyn Harris as Little Maria, the girl the monster accidentally kills; Dwight Frye as Frankenstein's hunchbacked assistant, Fritz; and Michael Mark as Ludwig, Maria's father. Kerr died a year and a half later.
Kenneth Strickfaden designed the electrical effects used in the "creation scene." So successful were they that such effects came to be considered an essential part of every subsequent Universal film involving the Frankenstein Monster. Accordingly, the equipment used to produce them has come to be referred to in fan circles as "Strickfadens." It appears that Strickfaden managed to secure the use of at least one Tesla Coil built by the inventor Nikola Tesla himself.
According to this same source, Strickfaden also doubled for Karloff during the creation scene, as Karloff was afraid of being burned by sparks being thrown off the arcing electrical equipment simulating lightning. Although he was partially covered by a surgical drape, Karloff's abdomen was otherwise exposed during the scene and the high-voltage arc "scissors" threw white-hot bits of metal when they were used to create flashes.
The film opened in New York City at the Mayfair Theatre on December 4, 1931, and grossed $53,000 in one week.
Censorship history.
The scene in which the monster throws the little girl into the lake and accidentally drowns her has long been controversial. Upon its original 1931 release, the second part of this scene was cut by state censorship boards in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and New York. Those states also objected to a line they considered blasphemous, one that occurred during Frankenstein's exuberance when he first learns that his creature is alive. The original line was: "It's alive! It's alive! In the name of God! Now I know what it feels like to "be" God!"
Kansas requested the cutting of 32 scenes, which, if removed, would have halved the length of the film. Jason Joy of the Studio Relations Committee sent censor representative Joseph Breen to urge them to reconsider. Eventually, an edited version was released in Kansas. The shot of Maria being thrown into the lake was rediscovered during the 1980s in the collection of the British National Film Archive. Modern copies incorporate it.
As with many Pre-Code films that were reissued after strict enforcement of the Production Code in 1934, Universal made cuts from the original camera negative.
Reception.
Mordaunt Hall gave "Frankenstein" a very positive review and said that the film "aroused so much excitement at the Mayfair yesterday that many in the audience laughed to cover their true feelings." "is no denying that it is far and away the most effective thing of its kind. Beside it "Dracula" is tame and, incidentally, "Dracula" was produced by the same firm".
"Film Daily" also lauded the picture, calling it a "gruesome, chill-producing and exciting drama" that was "produced intelligently and lavishly and with a grade of photography that is superb."
"Variety" reported that it "Looks like a "Dracula" plus, touching a new peak in horror plays," and described Karloff's performance as "a fascinating acting bit of mesmerism." Its review also singled out the look of the film as uniquely praiseworthy, calling the photography "splendid" and the lighting "the last word in ingenuity, since much of the footage calls for dim or night effect and the manipulation of shadows to intensify the ghostly atmosphere."
John Mosher of "The New Yorker" was less enthused, calling the film only a "moderate success" and writing that "The makeup department has a triumph to its credit in the monster and there lie the thrills of the picture, but the general fantasy lacks the vitality which that little Mrs. P.B. Shelley was able to give her book."
"Frankenstein" has continued to receive acclaim from critics and is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1931, as well as one of the greatest movies of all time. It holds a 100% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes. In 1991, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant". In 2004, "The New York Times" placed the film on its "Best 1000 Movies Ever" list.
"Frankenstein" also received recognition from the American Film Institute. It was named the 87th greatest movie of all time on "100 Years... 100 Movies". The line "It's alive! It's alive!" was ranked as the 49th greatest movie quote in American cinema. The film was on the ballot for several of AFI's "100 series" lists, including AFI's "10 Top 10" for the sci-fi category, "100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)", and twice on "100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains" for both Dr. Henry Frankenstein and the Monster in the villains category.
The film was ranked number 56 on AFI's "100 Years... 100 Thrills", a list of America's most heart-pounding movies. It was also ranked number 27 on Bravo's "100 Scariest Movie Moments". Additionally, the Chicago Film Critics Association named it the 14th scariest film ever made.
Box office.
The film was a big hit. In June 1932 the film had earned reported rentals of $1.4 million. In 1943 Universal reported it had earned a profit of $708,871. By 1953 all the Frankenstein films earned an estimated profit of $13 million.
Sequels and parodies.
"Frankenstein" was followed by a string of sequels, beginning with "Bride of Frankenstein" (1935), in which Elsa Lanchester plays the Monster's bride.
The next sequel, 1939's "Son of Frankenstein", was made, like all those that followed, without Whale or Clive (who had died in 1937). This film also featured Karloff's last full film performance as the Monster. "Son of Frankenstein" featured Basil Rathbone as Baron Wolf von Frankenstein, and Lionel Atwill as Inspector Krogh.
"The Ghost of Frankenstein" was released in 1942. The movie features Lon Chaney, Jr. as the Monster, taking over from Boris Karloff, who played the role in the first three films of the series, and Bela Lugosi in his second appearance as the demented Ygor.
The fifth installment, "Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man" was released in 1943, directed by Roy William Neill, and starring Bela Lugosi as Frankenstein's monster. This is also the sequel to "The Wolf Man", with Lon Chaney, Jr. as the Wolf Man. Karloff returned to the series, but not the role, in the 1944 followup, "House of Frankenstein", which also featured Chaney, and adds Dracula and a Hunchback for good measure. 1945's "House of Dracula" continued the theme of combining Universal's three most popular monsters.
Many of the subsequent films which featured Frankenstein's monster demote the creature to a robotic henchman in someone else's plots, such as in its final Universal film appearance in the deliberately farcical "Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein" (1948).
Karloff would return to the wearing of the makeup and to the role of the monster one last time in an episode of the TV show "Route 66" in the early 1960s.
The popular 1960s TV show, "The Munsters", depicts the family's father Herman as Frankenstein's monster, who married Count Dracula's daughter. The make-up for Herman is based on the make-up of Boris Karloff.
Mel Brooks's comedy "Young Frankenstein" parodied elements of the first three Universal "Frankenstein" movies. Brooks also recreated the movie into a musical of the same name.
A live-action parody film, "Frankenweenie", depicting Victor Frankenstein as a modern American boy and his deceased pet dog as the monster, was made by Tim Burton in 1984. Burton remade it as a full-length animated film in 2012.
Frankenstein's assistant.
Although Frankenstein's hunchbacked assistant is often referred to as "Igor" in descriptions of the films, he is not so called in the earliest films. In both "Frankenstein" and "Bride of Frankenstein", Frankenstein has an assistant who is played both times by Dwight Frye who is crippled. In the original 1931 film the character is named "Fritz" who is hunchbacked and walks with the aid of a small cane. In "Bride of Frankenstein", Frye plays "Karl" a murderer who stands upright but has a lumbering metal brace on both legs that can be heard clicking loudly with every step. Both characters would be killed by Karloff's monster in their respective films. It was not until "Son of Frankenstein" (1939) that a character called "Ygor" first appears (here played by Bela Lugosi and revived by Lugosi in the "Ghost of Frankenstein" (1942) after his apparent murder in the earlier film). This character — a deranged blacksmith whose neck was broken and twisted due to a botched hanging — befriends the monster and later helps Dr. Wolf Frankenstein, leading to the "hunchbacked assistant" called "Igor" commonly associated with "Frankenstein" in pop culture. Frye appears in later films in the series, such as in "Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man" (1943).
Possible reboot.
Guillermo del Toro had expressed interest in directing the reboot film for Universal. Del Toro said his "Frankenstein" would be a faithful "Miltonian tragedy", citing Frank Darabont's "near perfect" script, which evolved into Kenneth Branagh's "Frankenstein". Del Toro said of his vision, "What I'm trying to do is take the myth and do something with it, but combining elements of "Frankenstein" and "Bride of Frankenstein" without making it just a classical myth of the monster. The best moments in my mind of "Frankenstein", of the novel, are yet to be filmed [...] The only guy that has ever nailed for me the emptiness, not the tragic, not the Miltonian dimension of the monster, but the emptiness is Christopher Lee in the Hammer films, where he really looks like something obscenely alive. Boris Karloff has the tragedy element nailed down but there are so many versions, including that great screenplay by Frank Darabont that was ultimately not really filmed." He has also cited Bernie Wrightson's illustrations as inspiration, and said the film will not focus on the monster's creation, but be an adventure film featuring the character. Del Toro said he would like Wrightson to design his version of the creature. The film will also focus on the religious aspects of Shelley's tale. In June 2009, del Toro stated that production on "Frankenstein" was not likely to begin for at least four years. Despite this, he has already cast frequent collaborator Doug Jones in the role of Frankenstein's monster. In an interview with Sci Fi Wire, Jones stated that he learned of the news the same day as everybody else; that "Guillermo did say to the press that he’s already cast me as his monster, but we’ve yet to talk about it. But in his mind, if that’s what he’s decided, then it's done ... It would be a dream come true." The film will be a period piece.

</doc>
<doc id="73490" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73490" title="Regional handwriting variation">
Regional handwriting variation

Although people in many parts of the world share common alphabets and numeral systems (versions of the Latin writing system are used throughout the Americas, Australia, and much of Europe and Africa; the Hindu-Arabic numerals are nearly universal), styles of handwritten letterforms vary between individuals, and sometimes also vary systematically between regions.
Arabic numerals.
The handwritten numerals used in Western countries have two common forms:
Aside from these two main forms, other regional variations abound. The numeral one also can be confused with the lower case sans-serif "L".
The numeral 0 — Some writers put a diagonal slash through the numeral 0 (zero), a practice that was used on some early, low-resolution computer terminals which displayed a slashed "zero" glyph to distinguish it from the capital letter "O". This practice conflicts with the use of the letter "Ø" in the Danish and Norwegian languages, and the empty set character "∅" used in set theory. Forms that avoid confusion with Danish include: 
Confusion between the numeral 0 and the letter O can be resolved by using a script letter O (with a loop at the top), and leaving the numeral 0 without embellishments; this was a common practice before use of the slashed zero became the norm
The numeral 1 — This numeral is sometimes written with a serif at the top extending downward and to the left. People in some parts of Europe extend this stroke nearly the whole distance to the baseline. It is sometimes written with horizontal serifs at the base; without them it can resemble the shape of the numeral "7", which has a near-vertical stroke without a crossbar, and a shorter horizontal top stroke. This numeral is often written as a plain vertical line without an ear at the top; this form is easily confused with the capital letter I and with the lower-case letter L.
The numeral 2 — In the U.S., Germany and Austria a "curly" version used to be taught and is still used by many in handwriting. This 2 can be confused with a capital script Q, or a letter Z.
The numeral 3 — This numeral is sometimes written with a flat top, similar to the character Ʒ (ezh). This form is sometimes used to prevent people from fraudulently changing a 3 into an 8.
In Taiwan, the top is often written with a diagonal line from the top left, and the overall figure may be so changed that to foreigners it is completely unrecognizable even as a number.
The numeral 4 — Some people leave the top "open" — all the lines are either vertical or horizontal, as in a seven segment display. This makes it easier to distinguish from the numeral "9". Whether the horizontal bar terminates at or crosses the right vertical bar is insignificant in the West, but to be distinguished from certain Chinese characters it must cross.
The numeral 5 — In Taiwan, the left vertical bar is extended upwards as a long stem. If this is slanted, the overall figure may more closely resemble an uppercase "Y". If casually written it can be confused with a letter S.
The numeral 6 — Can be confused with a letter capital "G", or the lower case "b", or the "9" if inverted. In situations where the number 6 may appear at various angles (such as on billiard balls or some styles of playing cards), it can be underlined (appearing as "6") to indicate the proper viewing angle to disambiguate between "6" and "9"; a "9" may or may not appear with similar underlining (as "9").
The numeral 7 — The traditional form found in copperplate penmanship begins with a serif at the upper left and has a wavy horizontal stroke (a swash). In China and Japan, this numeral is commonly written with such a serif, but no swash and no crossbar through the middle. It is usually written with just two strokes, the top horizontal and the (usually angled) vertical. A short horizontal bar is sometimes used to cross the vertical in the middle, to distinguish the seven from a numeral one. This form is used commonly throughout Europe and frequently in Australia. In Taiwan two horizontal bars are sometimes used, although an exaggerated serif is the feature which most clearly distinguishes "7" from "1". When the cross is added in the center it can cause confusion with a script capital "F".
The numeral 9 — In parts of Europe, this numeral is written with the vertical ending in a hook at the bottom. This version resembles how the lowercase letter codice_1 is commonly written. () Elsewhere the usual shape is to draw the vertical straight to the baseline. In South Korea, the 9 is written with the loop above or even to the right of the stick. The backwards version can also be found in Southern Taiwan.
The Latin writing system.
The lowercase letter p — The French way of writing this character has a half-way ascender as the vertical extension of the descender, which also does not complete the bowl at the bottom. In early Finnish writing, the curve to the bottom was omitted, thus the resulting letter resembled a 'n' with a descender ('ɲ').
The lowercase letter q — In block letters, some Europeans like to cross the descender to prevent confusion with the numeral "9", which also can be written with a straight stem. In North America the descender often ends with a hook curving up to the right. ()
The lowercase letter s — See long s.
The lowercase letters u and v — These letters have a common origin and were once written according to the location in the word rather than the sound. The v came first; the u originally had a loop extending to the left and was only used to start words. All other locations for either u or v were written with the latter. In Germany (especially southern Germany), Austria and Switzerland, lowercase u is often written with a horizontal stroke or swish over it ("ū", "ũ"), to distinguish it from n.
The capital letter J — In Germany, this letter is often written with a long stroke to the left at the top. This is to distinguish it from the capital letter "I".
The capital letter S — In Japan, this letter is often written with a single serif added to the end of the stroke.
The capital letter Z — This letter is usually written with three strokes. In parts of Europe such as Germany and Spain, it is commonly written with a short horizontal crossbar added through the middle. This version is sometimes preferred in mathematics to help distinguish it from the numeral "2". In Polish, the character Ƶ is used as an allographic variant of the letter Ż. In Japan it is often written with a short diagonal crossbar through the middle. () In France, it is often written with a loop at the bottom.
Sütterlin script.
Until the mid 20th century, the form of handwriting taught in schools and generally used in Germany was very different from that used in other European countries, see Sütterlin. Interestingly, this was generally only used for German words. Any foreign words included in the text would usually be written in a "normal" script.
Slant.
The slant of a sample of writing is a reflection of the copybook that is taught. 

</doc>
<doc id="73494" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73494" title="Freaks">
Freaks

Freaks is a 1932 American Pre-Code horror film in which the eponymous characters were played by people who worked as carnival sideshow performers and had real deformities. The original version was considered too shocking to be released and no longer exists. Directed and produced by Tod Browning, whose career never recovered from it, "Freaks" has been described as standing alone in a subgenre of one.
At 16, Browning had left his well-to-do family to join a traveling circus: he drew on his personal experiences for "Freaks". Because of his success as the director of "Dracula", he was given a considerable leeway for a major studio's first horror film: this and the fact he was working in Pre-Code Hollywood enabled a unique production. In the film, the physically deformed "freaks" are inherently trusting and honorable people, while the real monsters are two of the "normal" members of the circus who conspire to murder one of the performers to obtain his large inheritance.
Plot.
The film opens with a sideshow barker drawing customers to visit the sideshow. A woman looks into a box to view a hidden occupant and screams. The barker explains that the horror in the box was once a beautiful and talented trapeze artist. The central story is of this conniving trapeze artist Cleopatra, who seduces and marries sideshow midget Hans after learning of his large inheritance. Cleopatra conspires with circus strongman Hercules to kill Hans and inherit his wealth. At their wedding reception, Cleopatra begins poisoning Hans' wine. Oblivious, the other "freaks" announce that they accept Cleopatra in spite of her being a "normal" outsider: they hold an initiation ceremony in which they pass a massive goblet of wine around the table while chanting, "We accept her, we accept her. One of us, one of us. Gooba-gobble, gooba-gobble". The ceremony frightens the drunken Cleopatra, who accidentally reveals that she has been having an affair with Hercules. She mocks the freaks, tosses the wine in their faces and drives them away. The humiliated Hans realizes that he's been played for a fool and rejects Cleopatra's attempts to apologize, but then he falls ill from the poison.
While bedridden, Hans pretends to apologize to Cleopatra and also pretends to take the poisoned medicine that she is giving him, but he secretly plots with the other freaks when to strike back at Cleopatra and Hercules. In the film's climax, the freaks attack the evil pair during a storm, wielding guns, knives and other sharp-edged weapons. Hercules is not seen again (the film's original ending had the freaks castrating him: the audience sees him later singing in falsetto). As for Cleopatra, she has become a grotesque, squawking "human duck". The flesh of her hands has been melted and deformed to look like duck feet, her legs have been cut off and what is left of her torso has been permanently tarred and feathered. She is the opening scene's cause for alarm.
In a final scene MGM inserted later for a happier ending, Hans is living a millionaire's life in a mansion. Venus and her clown boyfriend Phroso visit, bringing Frieda, to whom Hans had been engaged before meeting Cleopatra. Hans refuses to see them, but they force their way past his servant. Frieda assures Hans that she knows he tried to stop the others from exacting revenge. Phroso and Venus leave, Frieda comforts Hans when he starts to cry.
Subplots.
Spliced throughout the main narrative are a variety of "slice of life" segments detailing the lives of the sideshow performers.
Production.
MGM had purchased the rights to Robbins' short story, "Spurs", in the 1920s at Browning's urging. In June 1931, MGM production supervisor, Irving Thalberg, offered Browning the opportunity to direct "Arsène Lupin" with John Barrymore. Browning declined, preferring to develop "Freaks", a project he had started as early as 1927. Screenwriters Willis Goldbeck and Elliott Clawson were assigned to the project at Browning's request. Leon Gordon, Edgar Allan Woolf, Al Boasberg and an uncredited Charles MacArthur would also contribute to the script. The script was shaped over five months. Little of the original story was retained beyond the marriage between a midget and an average-sized woman and their wedding feast. Victor McLaglen was considered for the role of Hercules, whilst Myrna Loy was initially slated to star as Cleopatra, with Jean Harlow as Venus. Ultimately, Thalberg decided not to cast any major stars in the picture.
Among the characters featured as "freaks" were Peter Robinson ("The Human Skeleton"); Olga Roderick ("The Bearded Lady"); Frances O'Connor and Martha Morris ("armless wonders"); and the conjoined twins Daisy and Violet Hilton. Among the microcephalics who appear in the film (and are referred to as "pinheads") were Zip and Pip (Elvira and Jenny Lee Snow) and Schlitzie, a male named Simon Metz who wore a dress mainly due to incontinence, a disputed claim. Also featured were the intersex Josephine Joseph, with her left-right divided gender; Johnny Eck, the legless man; the completely limbless Prince Randian (also known as The Human Torso and mis-credited as "Rardion"); Elizabeth Green the Stork Woman; and Koo-Koo the Bird Girl, who had Virchow-Seckel syndrome or bird-headed dwarfism and is most remembered for the scene wherein she dances on the table.
"Freaks" began principal photography in October 1931 and was completed in December. Following disastrous test screenings in January 1932 (one woman threatened to sue MGM, claiming the film had caused her to suffer a miscarriage), the studio cut the picture down from its original 90-minute running time to just over an hour. Much of the sequence of the freaks attacking Cleopatra, as she lays under a tree, was removed, as well as a gruesome sequence showing Hercules being castrated, a number of comedy sequences and most of the film's original epilogue. A new prologue featuring a carnival barker was added, as was the new epilogue featuring the reconciliation of the tiny lovers. This shortened version — now only 64 minutes long — had its premiere at the Fox Criterion in Los Angeles on February 20, 1932.
Reception.
Despite the extensive cuts, the film was still negatively received by audiences, recording a loss of $164,000, and remained an object of extreme controversy. Today, the scenes that were removed are considered lost. Browning, famed at the time for his collaborations with Lon Chaney and for directing Bela Lugosi in "Dracula" (1931), had trouble finding work afterward and this effectively brought his career to an early close. ""Freaks"" became the only M-G-M film ever to be pulled from release before completing its domestic engagements. Because the film was thought to be overly exploitative, it was banned in the United Kingdom for 30 years. 
A number of contemporary reviews were not only highly critical of the film, but expressed outrage and revulsion. "Harrison's Reports" wrote that "Any one who considers this entertainment should be placed in the pathological ward in some hospital." In "The Kansas City Star", John C. Moffitt wrote, "There is no excuse for this picture. It took a weak mind to produce it and it takes a strong stomach to look at it." "The Hollywood Reporter" called it an "outrageous onslaught upon the feelings, the senses, the brains and the stomachs of an audience."
"Variety" also published a negative review, writing that the film was "sumptuously produced, admirably directed, and no cost was spared, but Metro heads failed to realize that even with a different sort of offering the story is still important. Here the story is not sufficiently strong to get and hold the interest, partly because interest cannot easily be gained for too fantastic a romance." The review went on to state that the story "does not thrill and at the same time does not please, since it is impossible for the normal man or woman to sympathize with the aspiring midget. And only in such a case will the story appeal."
Not all reviews were as harsh. "The New York Times" called it "excellent at times and horrible, in the strict meaning of the word, at others" as well as "a picture not to be easily forgotten." The "New York Herald Tribune" wrote that it was "obviously an unhealthy and generally disagreeable work," but that "in some strange way, the picture is not only exciting, but even occasionally touching."
John Mosher of "The New Yorker" wrote a positive review, calling it "a little gem" that "stands in a class by itself, and probably won't be forgotten in a hurry by those who see it." He found its "perfectly plausible story" a key to the effectiveness of its horror, writing that "It's a chilling notion to imagine these weird beings, with their own lives and vanities and passions, all allied in a bitter enmity against us." Addressing the controversial subject matter, Mosher stated: "if the poor things themselves can be displayed in the basement of Madison Square Garden, pictures of them might as well be shown in the Rialto. They may hereafter even be regarded in the flesh with a new dread bordering on respect."
Later years.
In 1947 MGM sold the rights to the film to Dwain Esper for $50,000.
Beginning in the early 1960s, "Freaks" was rediscovered as a counterculture cult film and throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the film was regularly shown at midnight movie screenings at several theaters in the United States. In 1994, "Freaks" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". It was ranked 15th on Bravo TV's list of the 100 Scariest Movie Moments.
On film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, "Freaks" holds a 93% "fresh" rating based on 45 reviews; the general consensus states: "Time has been kind to this horror legend: "Freaks" manages to frighten, shock, and even touch viewers in ways that contemporary viewers missed."

</doc>
<doc id="73497" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73497" title="From the Manger to the Cross">
From the Manger to the Cross

From the Manger to the Cross or Jesus of Nazareth is a 1912 American motion picture that was filmed on location in Palestine. It tells the story of Jesus' life. Directed by Sidney Olcott who also appeared in the film, actress and screenwriter Gene Gauntier wrote the script and portrayed the Virgin Mary.
The film received excellent reviews at the time of its original release. After Vitagraph Studios acquired Kalem, the film was re-released in February 1919.
Production background.
According to Turner Classic Movies, the film cost $35,000 to produce (roughly between $1,600,000 and $3,300,000 adjusted to 2007 dollars); another source says that Olcott spent $100,000 of his own money on the project. Although the film's profits eventually amounted to almost $1 million (roughly $46,000,000 to $95,000,000), the Kalem directors refused to increase Olcott's basic salary and he resigned.
In later years, Louis B. Mayer, head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, would say this was the premiere film for his movie theater in Haverhill, Massachusetts and a major boost for him in the movie business. However, most sources place the release date of this film as 1912, long after the opening of Mayer's theater.
At around 5,000 feet it was one of the longer films to be released to date, although the Kinemacolor documentary With Our King and Queen Through India released in February 1912 ran to 16,000 feet; and another religious film - the hand-coloured "The Miracle" - was released in the UK at 7,000 feet in December 1912.
Reception in Britain.
The five-reel film showed at the Queen's Hall, London, for eight months (a relatively lengthy run for the time). A statement by Israel Zangwill (founder of the Jewish Territorialist Organization) describing it as "An artistic triumph — the kinema put to its true end" appeared on advertising bills outside the Queen's Hall.
"From the Manger to the Cross" gained considerable publicity from an outcry in the "Daily Mail": "Is nothing sacred to the film maker?" it demanded, and waxed indignant about the profits for its American film producers. Although the clergy were invited to see it and found little to be affronted by, the controversy resulted in the voluntary creation of the British Board of Film Censors which began operating on 1 January 1913.
Rediscovery.
The film disappeared from cinema screens for a number of years until the Rev. Brian Hession, vicar of Holy Trinity Church in Walton, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, went on a quest to the US to find a copy of the film for re-issue in Britain. Although initially disappointed, he eventually discovered a set of negatives after searching in the vaults and cellars of old film concerns. Hession added a musical sound track and spoken commentary, and "From the Manger to the Cross" was re-released in 1938.
Critical reception.
TCM host Robert Osborne and the National Film Preservation Foundation consider this film to be the most important silent film to deal with the life of Christ. In 1998, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.
A history of cinemas and film-making published in 1947 had this to say: "To-day it appears to be somewhat overacted, and the camera work is stilted, the camera being merely a recording instrument and not part of the pattern of the exposition of the story itself. Its pace is slow by modern standards, doubtless an attempt to obtain dignity, and Bland's performance is so sedately remote as to be not so much an acting performance at all but a series of dignified poses."

</doc>
<doc id="73498" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73498" title="Fury (1936 film)">
Fury (1936 film)

Fury is a 1936 American drama film directed by Fritz Lang which tells the story of an innocent man (Spencer Tracy) who narrowly escapes being lynched and the revenge he seeks. The picture was released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and stars Sylvia Sidney and Tracy, with a supporting cast featuring Walter Abel, Bruce Cabot, Edward Ellis and Walter Brennan. Loosely based on the events surrounding the Brooke Hart murder, the movie was adapted by Bartlett Cormack and Lang from the story "Mob Rule" by Norman Krasna. "Fury" was Lang's first American film.
Plot.
En route to meet his fiancée, Katherine Grant (Sylvia Sidney), Joe Wilson (Spencer Tracy) is arrested on flimsy circumstantial evidence for the kidnapping of a child. Gossip soon travels around the small town, growing more distorted through each retelling, until a mob gathers at the jail. When the resolute sheriff (Edward Ellis) refuses to give up his prisoner, the enraged townspeople burn down the building, two of them also throwing dynamite into the flames as they flee the scene. Unknown to anyone else there, the blast frees Wilson, but kills his little dog Rainbow, who had run in to comfort him in the cell.
The district attorney (Walter Abel) brings the main perpetrators to trial for murder, but nobody is willing to identify the guilty, and several provide alibis. The case seems hopeless, but then the prosecutor produces hard evidence: newsreel footage of twenty-two people caught in the act.
However, Katherine is troubled by one piece of evidence. The defense attorney had tried to get his clients off by claiming that there was no proof Joe was killed, but an anonymous letter writer had returned a partially melted ring belonging to Joe. Katherine notices that a word is misspelled just as Joe used to spell it.
She discovers that Joe escaped the fire and that Joe's brothers are helping him get his revenge by framing the defendants for his murder. She goes to see Joe and pleads with him to stop the charade, but he is determined to make his would-be killers pay. However, his conscience starts preying on him and, in the end, just as the verdicts are being read, he walks into the courtroom and sets things straight.
Production.
Norman Krasna was inspired to write the story after reading about a lynching in "The Nation". He pitched the idea to Samuel Marx and Joseph Mankiewicz at MGM who were attracted to it. Krasna says he never actually wrote the story down, he verbally pitched it to Mankiewicz who then dictated it. A number of changes were made from Krasna's story to the final script.
"Fury" was Lang's first American film, and is considered by critics to have been compromised by the studio, which forced Lang to tack on a reconciliation between Tracy's character and his girlfriend at the end. The film was a major departure for MGM, which at the time was known for lavish musicals and glitzy dramas – the expensive production features expansive and stylised sets to create its gritty world and its style is more in keeping with the social issue films associated with Warner Brothers, such as "I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang".
The part of Wilson's dog Rainbow was played by Terry, the same Cairn Terrier who played Toto in "The Wizard of Oz".
Reception.
The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Writing, Original Story. In 1995, this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The movie was very popular, earning domestic rentals of $685,000 and $617,000 overseas. According to MGM records, the final profit was $248,000.

</doc>
<doc id="73499" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73499" title="Grand Admiral Thrawn">
Grand Admiral Thrawn

Grand Admiral Thrawn (full name: Mitth'raw'nuruodo) is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the "Star Wars" universe. He first appeared in Timothy Zahn's "Thrawn trilogy" — "Heir to the Empire", "Dark Force Rising" and "The Last Command" — published between 1991 and 1993. In these books, set five years after "Return of the Jedi", Thrawn has assumed command of the remaining forces of the Empire and is planning to battle the New Republic. He has subsequently appeared in numerous other "Star Wars" expanded universe works, including five more novels by Zahn.
Depiction.
Grand Admiral Thrawn is described as a tall, solidly built humanoid with blue skin and glowing red eyes. Because of the Empire's policy of discrimination against non-humans, he is the only non-human to reach the Imperial Navy's highest rank – that of Grand Admiral. Thrawn's promotion is long kept secret by Emperor Palpatine, and at the beginning of the "Thrawn" series the New Republic appears to be entirely unaware of his identity, or even his existence. He is also the last Grand Admiral promoted by the Emperor; he earns the rank because of his instrumental role in stopping Grand Admiral Zaarin's attempted coup, receiving the late Zaarin's rank and position as a reward. As a Grand Admiral, he wears the white uniform befitting his rank. This is distinguished from the standard charcoal grey or olive colored uniforms that Imperial officers wore, as shown in the original "Star Wars" trilogy.
Zahn describes Thrawn's command style as considerably different from that of Darth Vader and other typical Imperial commanders; instead of punishing failure and dissent, Thrawn promotes creativity among his crew and accepts ideas from subordinates. He is a tactical genius who has made extensive study of military intelligence and art, and is willing to retreat instead of making a stand in a losing battle.
He is a brilliant military strategist and commands the remnants of the Imperial Fleet in a series of stunning victories against the New Republic. His study of his enemies' artwork gives him insight into their thought processes and cultures, allowing him to create highly effective tailor-made strategies.
Thrawn is his "core" name, reminiscent of the Scots word "thrawn", meaning "twisted or crooked". His full name is only known to a few select individuals of the Empire and the New Republic.
Pre-empire.
Origin.
Thrawn is a Chiss, a species of aliens from the Unknown Regions.
Chiss Expansionary Fleet.
Thrawn rises to the rank of Commander in the Chiss Expansionary Fleet. He becomes convinced that the Chiss were facing a threat from an unknown but powerful foe and also from a nomadic race of slavers, known as the Vagaari. Aware of the risk posed by fighting a war on two fronts, he decides that it is necessary to launch a pre-emptive strike to destroy the Vagaari. Thrawn largely goes against the Chiss rule of non-aggression, repeatedly baiting his enemies to commit an act of aggression against the forces under his command, but colludes with Admiral Ar'alani (who had commanded the task force that fought off an initial incursion from the Far Outsiders) to eliminate the Vagaari to prevent a two-front war. Thrawn also captures a trio of smugglers, among them Jorj Car'das. His curiosity piqued, Thrawn keeps them around in order to learn more about them, including their culture and their language.
Outbound Flight Project.
Palpatine was first alerted to Thrawn's tactical genius before the rise of the Empire, when the Sith Lord was still the Chancellor of the Republic. The Outbound Flight Project, a Jedi expedition into deep space, was to be intercepted and destroyed by Special Task Force One — a formidable squadron of Neimoidian and Techno Union combat vessels — under the direction of Darth Sidious; however, before this could occur, these elite Trade Federation forces were themselves ambushed and nearly annihilated by Thrawn's defense forces. Thrawn's smaller force exploited weaknesses in the communications system of the Task Force's droid fighters and deployed conner nets against the fighters and the Techno Union ships' missiles, turning fighters and missiles into weapons against their own host Task Force.
Sidious was represented on the scene by his trusted advisor Kinman Doriana, using the alias Commander Stratis. Doriana/Stratis was "secretly" serving both Sidious and Palpatine, himself unaware that they were one and the same. Stunned by Thrawn's victory and scrambling to survive both this encounter and the Sith Lord's wrath over his failure, Doriana decided to risk exposing his true name, agenda, and position within the Republic. He met privately with Thrawn, introducing him to Sidious via HoloNet in an attempt to convince Thrawn that the Jedi expedition could expose the Republic to a new alien threat Sidious had sensed at the edge of the galaxy. Thrawn knew of the alien species to which Doriana and Sidious referred, the Chiss having already encountered a small scout group of these "Far Outsiders" (the Yuuzhan Vong, though their identity is not revealed) and defeated them. With this new alien threat reinforced by Palpatine and Doriana, Thrawn agreed that allowing Outbound Flight to proceed as planned posed a danger, possibly to the Chiss as well as the Republic. Thrawn confronted Jedi Master and Outbound Flight Leader Jorus C'baoth and entreated him to avoid Chiss space and leave the galaxy in a different direction. C'baoth refused.
To defeat the formidable Jedi forces aboard Outbound Flight, Thrawn maneuvered around investigations of his activities by superior officers, and he conspired with his guest Jorj Car'das into luring the Vagaari, an aggressive nomadic species operating near Chiss space, into a double trap, for Outbound Flight and the Vagaari. Thrawn used a Vagaari gravity well generator (a weapon unknown in Chiss and Republic space until stolen by Thrawn from the Vagaari earlier in the book) to pull both the Vagaari fleet and Outbound Flight out of hyperspace at a point within the patrol area of Thrawn's Chiss Expansionary Defense Fleet. Thrawn thought the Vagaari would find such a large, tempting vessel irresistible, and he was correct; the Vagaari immediately attempted to attack Outbound Flight. Thrawn's forces controlled the droid fighters remaining from the earlier Trade Federation engagement and used them to cripple the Vagaari fleet while that fleet also struggled against C'baoth's Jedi mind-meld attack.
Thrawn later maneuvered his vessels to a point within Outbound Flight's shields and destroyed the Dreadnaughts' weapons pods, where almost all of the Jedi were manning turbolasers. He wiped out nearly the entire Jedi population of the vessel in this one attack. Jorus C'baoth, having succumbed to the dark side, attacked Thrawn with the Force. Doriana, in a last-ditch effort to save Thrawn, threw a toggle switch on Thrawn's command chair, causing the droid fighters to stop attacking the Vagaari and instead perform suicide runs against Outbound Flight, and causing other fighters to penetrate the hulls of the Dreadnaught vessels with a lethal radiation weapon. These attacks weapons, which Thrawn had hoped to avoid using, killed almost the entire Outbound Flight population, nearly 50,000 individuals. Only a small group of people deep within the storage core survived. Thrawn was deeply saddened, as mass murder had never been part of his plan.
Exile.
Thrawn was later exiled from Chiss society to an uninhabited planet. Many years later he was discovered by (then) Captain Parck. After seeing his unique tactical abilities, Captain Parck offered him a commission in the newly formed Imperial Navy, promising that in time Thrawn would be allowed to return with a force powerful enough to protect his people.
Thrawn and the Empire.
Early Imperial career.
Thrawn's early Imperial career has been described in several "Star Wars" stories. Thrawn was originally a Captain of the "Victory"-class Star Destroyer "Stalwart" and commanded several deep space expeditions. He was then promoted to Rear Admiral and Vice Admiral, respectively, and was in charge of a forward deployed fleet. He also played a hand in Research and Development.
In the "Star Wars" computer game "", an early campaign (Tour of Duty 3) showed how Thrawn established order in a "wild" system at the frontiers of the Empire. Thrawn foiled a coup attempt against the Emperor by the renegade Grand Admiral Zaarin with the aid of his top pilot Maarek Stele. Thrawn and Stele afterward helped to nullify Zaarin's TIE Defenders by developing the Missile Gunboat. As a result of his efforts, he was promoted to Grand Admiral. Although Thrawn and Zaarin were very much tactical equals, Thrawn eventually outsmarted and defeated his nemesis for good.
Opponents and Unknown Regions.
Thrawn did have enemies within Imperial loyalist circles. Prince-Admiral Delak Krennel (who briefly collaborated with Ysanne Isard in "") formerly served under Thrawn, but Krennel's career with the Imperial Navy was almost ruined after Thrawn dismissed him. Captain Dorja of the ISD "Relentless" was openly critical of Thrawn and Gilad Pellaeon, even when his Destroyer was part of Thrawn's personal squadron.
During the Dark Horse "Star Wars" comic, "The Making of Baron Fel", Baron Soontir Fel was an ace pilot with the 181st Imperial fighter division who distinguished himself during the ambush of a Rebel convoy. That operation was planned by Thrawn, although Darth Vader gave the orders. The Baron noted that "an alien (such as Thrawn) in such a high position of command was very unusual, given the Empire's extreme xenophobia. Perhaps due to xenophobia or the maneuvering of Isard, the Imperial intelligence director, Thrawn went unrewarded after the successful ambush."
Thrawn would become involved in Imperial court politics, as Mara Jade would later reminisce; all thought that his exile was due to his political defeat by Grand Admiral Rufaan Tigellinus. Actually, Palpatine and Thrawn together had planned his 'exile', with Palpatine quietly feeding him troops and ships to pacify the areas of the Unknown regions without anyone the wiser. After the Rebellion successfully dethroned the Empire at the Battle of Endor, Thrawn returned from the Unknown Regions. Thrawn assumed command of the Empire and took the Star Destroyer "Chimaera" as his command ship.
Heir to the Empire.
Upon assuming command of the Empire, Thrawn immediately began to seek ways to destroy the Republic despite their numerical advantage. A data raid on Obroa-Skai provided the answer - Mount Tantiss, the late Emperor's storehouse, which contained a massive array of Spaarti Cloning cylinders, as well as a working cloaking shield. He also discovered something else - Joruus C'baoth, the clone of the Jedi Master he had killed aboard Outbound Flight. With the promise of new Jedi to mold as he pleased, Thrawn convinced C'baoth to aid them, coordinating the Imperial fleet as the Emperor had originally done.
While this put Thrawn in a strong position, he was confronted by the Imperial Navy's lack of ships. To this end, he raided the shipyards at Sluis Van with mole-miners stolen from Lando Calrissian, hoping to steal an array of unmanned warships docked in the system. He was thwarted by Calrissian who turned the mole miners against him. Despite this setback, he continued to prepare for the Mt Tantiss campaign, removing Ackbar, his most formidable opponent, via political intrigue. His dilemma over ships was soon solved when he discovered leads on the Katana fleet, a lost fleet of 200 Dreadnaught class Heavy Cruisers. While political intrigues on Coruscant delayed a Republic response, Thrawn seized all but 21 of the ships, and crewed them with his massive new army of clones.
Thrawn then launched his campaign. His tactical and strategic insight allowed him to score huge gains against the Republic (the "New Essential Chrononlogy" records that he added over a quarter of the galaxy to the Imperial's existing territory, allowing him control over half the galaxy). He would even blockade Coruscant with a subtle bluff that made them believe they were surrounded by invisible (cloaked) asteroids. However, Thrawn was at the same time being slowly undone. Princess Leia had managed to convince the Noghri, Thrawn's army of silent killers, of the Imperial treachery to keep them in servitude. At the same time he was engaged in a power struggle with C'baoth, who had declared himself the true ruler of the Empire, eventually consigning him to Mt Tantiss. The Republic sought to strike back by hitting the Imperial shipyards at Bilbringi, but Thrawn outguessed them and had his fleet waiting for them.
Thrawn was assassinated during the battle, at the end of "The Last Command", the final novel in the Zahn trilogy. His bodyguard, Rukh, discovered the betrayal of the Noghri race by Darth Vader, the Emperor and Thrawn, and took vengeance against the only one he could, stabbing him aboard his flagship the "Chimaera" in the middle of the climactic Battle of Bilbringi. Thrawn's last words were simply: "But…it was so artistically done." With the cloning tanks at Mt Tantiss also destroyed, the Empire was left in full retreat once more.
About ten years later, Luke Skywalker and Mara Jade discovered that Thrawn had created a clone of himself, which would have awoken exactly a decade after Thrawn's defeat. While Skywalker and Jade debated the ethics of killing it, the fire of the security systems caused Jade to cut a hole in the wall bordering a lake, drowning the clone. It was later speculated by Luke and Mara Jade Skywalker, after the events of Outbound Flight, that there was another Thrawn clone loose somewhere in the galaxy who had arranged the Vagaari attack in Chiss space at the remains of the Outbound Flight Project, so that the Chiss could be deliberately provoked into dealing with them once and for all. However, this theory remains unproven.
Thrawn and the Yuuzhan Vong.
In the novel "Outbound Flight" by Timothy Zahn, the Chiss knew of the Yuuzhan Vong long before the Republic or Empire. It was in fact then-Commander Thrawn's superior officer, Chiss Admiral Ar'alani, who had engaged a scout group of the species. This first encounter was concluded with a Chiss victory against the force, but Admiral Ar'alani noted that they had fought with an impressive ferocity.
During the Outbound Flight project, a Trade Federation task force dispatched by Darth Sidious to defeat Outbound Flight was intercepted and soundly defeated by Commander Thrawn. During the surrender of the remaining Republic forces, Thrawn was put in contact with Lord Sidious. Sidious had foreseen this new alien threat and saw it critical to prevent the large Jedi and Republic citizen populace from being captured and interrogated by the Vong. Such an occurrence would give the Vong a critical informational advantage over the Republic and the Chiss, perhaps throwing off chances of a successful defense against the alien species.
Thrawn was not oblivious to the threat this posed to his people. He required that Outbound Flight change course or be destroyed. Jedi Master Jorus C'baoth and the other Jedi aboard the Flight were oblivious to the threat known thus far only to the Chiss and the Sith. C'baoth at this time was also falling to the dark side, after assuming a dictatorial role over the Outbound Flight populace. He had become incredibly arrogant and was unable to see past his own pride and belief in his invincibility. C'baoth ignored Thrawn's peaceful request for them to simply leave the area and continue their journey on another course. And so Thrawn orchestrated Outbound Flight's defeat. This maintained the Chiss Ascendancy's protective isolation from both the Republic and Vong.
When Thrawn eventually returned to the Unknown Regions, having been made a Grand Admiral by Emperor Palpatine, he carved out a huge empire, going by the name Empire of the Hand. When Luke and Mara Jade Skywalker investigated Thrawn's personal fortress, they encountered the Imperial officer who had first brought Thrawn to the Empire - Admiral Voss Parck. Parck indicated that Thrawn's campaign against the Republic was not solely out of a personal desire to gain power, but to prepare the galaxy against a coming threat - likely the Vong. Later, after the rediscovery of the Outbound Flight remains, Luke and Mara Jade Skywalker speculated that part of the reason behind the Chiss desire for an excuse to wage war on the Vagaari was because the Vagaari had already made contact with the threat (probably the Yuuzhan Vong) and had allied with them.
Command style.
Thrawn was considered a true warrior by those who served under him. If a battle Thrawn planned could not be won, Thrawn preferred not to waste troops and equipment in futile displays of power; he would withdraw and adjust his plans. He also encouraged Captain Gilad Pellaeon to voice his ideas, because, unlike many egotistical Imperial commanders, Thrawn could accept valid ideas even if they were not his own. Thrawn was not concerned with his own personal glory, only with winning the fight against the New Republic (which he refused to acknowledge as such, instead constantly referring to it as "the Rebellion").
Thrawn was more tolerant of the failures of those under his command than other Imperial officials, who were known for their lethal reaction to minor failures. Unlike Darth Vader in particular, Thrawn would not regularly terminate individuals under his command for "errors". Two examples of his command style involved tractor beam operators onboard his flagship "Chimaera", in separate attempts to capture Luke Skywalker. In the first, tractor beam operator Cris Pieterson - an enlisted conscript - refused to accept responsibility for failing to capture Skywalker and referred Thrawn to his superior, Ensign Colclazure. In response, Thrawn had Pieterson executed while sparing the ensign, instructing him to train a replacement. Later, when Skywalker escaped a similar trap, an ensign named Mithel had tried an innovative solution in an attempt to capture him. Instead of having the man killed for failure, Thrawn recognized Mithel's initiative and promoted him to Lieutenant. This attitude further drove those that served him to both highly respect and fiercely stand by Thrawn.
Thrawn is known for a supremely unique command style. He would view the native art of a given species or planet to understand them better as a race or planet, and so too, gain insight into their military style. He believed the study of this art would give him an advantage in battle, since it provided him with information on the psyche of his opponents and informed him of their psychological blind spots. His immediate subordinate, Pellaeon, voices the opinion that Thrawn's analysis of art was merely a cover for his true military analyses, which he would want to keep secret to stymie enemy spies. One of Thrawn's notable victories was the capture of the food producing planet Ukio. The typical Imperial doctrine of a bombardment and siege would have been costly to both sides and left the planet in ruins. Thrawn determined that the defenders had a strong superstitious fear of the unknown and used cloaked vessels to frighten them into submission, forcing the submission of the planet with minimum casualties.
He was known as one of the most brilliant military commanders in the "Star Wars" universe and was superior to even geniuses such as General Garm Bel Iblis (who only later joined the New Republic due to personal issues with the Rebel Alliance's leader Mon Mothma) and Admiral Ackbar, who led the Rebellion to victory in many crucial battles.
While the Emperor and many high-ranking officials spent billions of credits on super weapons and grandiose warships (like the Death Star, Eye of Palpatine, and Super Star Destroyers "Executor" and "Eclipse"), that may have been powerful intimidating symbols of might but less practical for military purposes, Thrawn preferred to use existing technologies in novel ways in part due to his resource constraints. He turned medium-sized capital ships like Carrack cruisers and Victory-class Star Destroyers into formidable weapons, and he used Interdictor cruisers (whose gravity wells were originally intended to stop enemy ships from escaping to hyperspace) to vector in the timely arrival of his reinforcements (a tactic dubbed the "Thrawn Pincer").
Ironically, Thrawn was also personally responsible for one of the greatest setbacks to the Imperial cause. His ruthless persecution of smuggler Talon Karrde and estrangement of former Emperor's Hand Mara Jade led directly to her decision to aid the Rebel Alliance. Mara's support proved decisive in the campaign to destroy the Empire's cloning facilities at Mt. Tantiss: in the final confrontation with insane Jedi Master Joruus C'Baoth, she landed the killing blow.
It was later postulated that Thrawn did not support the Empire "per se", but rather wanted to establish order in the known galaxy in preparation to combat as-yet unknown threats he had discovered during his time in the Outer Rim (probably early scouts of the Yuuzhan Vong).
Impostors.
At the time of the Hand of Thrawn incident, the high-ranking Moff Disra employed a con artist known as Flim to impersonate Grand Admiral Thrawn. Flim was a talented mimic, able to imitate Thrawn's voice and mannerisms, and an excellent actor - he studied Thrawn's biography and career points so that he would not be caught out by questions for which he had not prepared.
Disra's intention in hiring Flim was to motivate Imperial forces into fighting instead of giving up. However, Major Grodin Tierce (or rather his clone with Thrawn's own genius - the experimental warlord, created 2 months before Thrawn's death on Bilbringi) created a new strategy - to use Flim as a commercial for other planets to join Empire, and to scare the New Republic. The New Republic would do nothing to stop this, as their members' charter allowed member worlds to exit at any time. Tierce also wanted revenge on the New Republic for the destruction of the Empire, and it was this desire that led to the triumvirate's downfall.
When General Garm Bel Iblis of the New Republic attacked the Ubiqtorate Base on Yaga Minor, Talon Karrde and Admiral Pellaeon – who wanted peace between the Empire and the New Republic – were able to foil Disra and Tierce's scheme by revealing Flim's identity, thanks to a datacard given to Karrde by Jorj Car'das. Once revealed to be an impostor, Flim surrendered to Admiral Pellaeon and was taken into custody. Flim's ultimate fate is not known.
Portrayal.
Thrawn was played by Robin Atkin Downes in '. In the audio drama "Dark Forces: Soldier for the Empire", he is played by Tim Russell. In ' he is played by Tris King. Robin Atkin Downes reprises his role as Thrawn in "". Like all the characters therein, he is played by Denis Lawson in the abridged "Heir to the Empire" audiobook and by Anthony Daniels in the abridged audiobooks for "Dark Force Rising" and "The Last Command". In the unabridged 20th Anniversary editions of the Thrawn Trilogy audiobooks, Grand Admiral Thrawn is portrayed by voice artist Marc Thompson.
Reception.
Thrawn, and the Thrawn trilogy, are credited by IGN as "kickstarting" the "Star Wars" expanded universe, while "Empire" felt Thrawn's character helped "revitalize and legitmise" the Expanded Universe when it was failing. Due to this, "Empire" listed him as one of the best more obscure "Star Wars" characters. GamesRadar's Sam Ashurst called him "hugely popular amongst fans, partly because of his tactical genius, partly because of his progressive attitude to his employees but mainly due to the fact he’s got a blue face" and "easily the coolest villain in the Expanded Universe", noting his loss as one of the major consequences of Disney's abandonment of the old Expanded Universe for "".
The character has been on many "top" lists of "Star Wars" characters, praising his villainy and character. In a list of fifteen "Star Wars" villains, Jesse Schedeen of IGN placed him as second best, beaten by Darth Vader, focusing on his greatness as a commander and tactician. IGN would similarly call him the tenth best overall "Star Wars" character, noting his influence in the Expanded Universe, and UGO listed him as the third greatest Expanded Universe character.

</doc>
<doc id="73502" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73502" title="Thera (disambiguation)">
Thera (disambiguation)

Thera is a Greek island, also known as Santorini.
Thera may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="73509" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73509" title="JT">
JT

JT may stand for:

</doc>
<doc id="73511" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73511" title="T–V distinction">
T–V distinction

In sociolinguistics, a T–V distinction (from the Latin pronouns "tu" and "vos") is a contrast, within one language, between various forms of addressing one's conversation partner or partners that are specialized for varying levels of politeness, social distance, courtesy, familiarity, age or insult toward the addressee. Languages such as modern English that, outside of certain dialects, have no morphosyntactic T–V distinction may have semantic analogues to convey the mentioned attitudes towards the addressee, such as whether to address someone by given or surname, or whether to use "sir" or "ma'am". Under a broader classification, T and V forms are examples of honorifics.
History and usage.
The terms T and V, based on the Latin pronouns "tu" and "vos", were first used in a paper by the social psychologist Roger Brown and the Shakespearian scholar Albert Gilman. This was a historical and contemporary survey of the uses of pronouns of address, seen as semantic markers of social relationships between individuals. The study considered mainly French, Italian, Spanish and German. The paper was highly influential and with few exceptions, the terms T and V have been used in subsequent studies.
Origin.
In Latin, "tu" was originally the singular, and "vos" the plural, with no distinction for honorific or familiar. According to Brown and Gilman, usage of the plural to the Roman emperor began in the fourth century AD. They mention the possibility that this was because there were two emperors at that time (in Constantinople and Rome), but also mention that "plurality is a very old and ubiquitous metaphor for power". This usage was extended to other powerful figures, such as Pope Gregory I (590–604). However, Brown and Gilman note that it was only between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries that the norms for the use of T- and V-forms crystallized. Less commonly, the use of the plural may be extended to other persons, such as the "royal we" (majestic plural) in English.
Brown and Gilman argued that the choice of form is governed by either relationships of 'power' and/or 'solidarity', depending on the culture of the speakers, showing that 'power' had been the dominant predictor of form in Europe until the twentieth century. Thus, it was quite normal for a powerful person to use a T-form but expect a V-form in return. However, in the twentieth century the dynamic shifted in favour of solidarity, so that people would use T-forms with those they knew, and V-forms in service encounters, with reciprocal usage being the norm in both cases.
Early history: the power semantic.
In the Early Middle Ages (the 5th century to the 10th century), the pronoun "vos" was used to address the most exalted figures, emperors and popes, who would use the pronoun "tu" to address a subject. This use was progressively extended to other states and societies, and down the social hierarchy as a mark of respect to individuals of higher rank, religious authority, greater wealth, or seniority within a family. The development was slow and erratic, but a consistent pattern of use is estimated to have been reached in different European societies by the period 1100 to 1500. Use of V spread to upper-class individuals of equal rank, but not to lower class individuals.
This may be represented in Brown and Gilman's notation:
Modification: the solidarity semantic.
Speakers developed greater flexibility of pronoun use by redefining relationships between individuals. Instead of defining the father-son relationship as one of power, it could be seen as a shared family relationship. Brown and Gilman term this the semantics of solidarity. Thus a speaker might have a choice of pronoun, depending on how they perceived the relationship with the person addressed. Thus a speaker with superior power might choose V to express fellow feeling with a subordinate. For example, a restaurant customer might use V to his favourite waiter. Similarly a subordinate with a friendly relationship of long standing might use T. For example, a child might use T to express affection for his or her parent.
This may be represented as:
These choices were available not only to reflect permanent relationships, but to express momentary changes of attitude. This allowed playwrights such as Racine, Molière, Ben Johnson, Marlowe and Shakespeare to express a character's inner changes of mood through outward changes of pronoun.
For centuries, it was the more powerful individual who chose to address a subordinate either with T or with V, or to allow the subordinate to choose. For this reason, the pronouns were traditionally defined as the "pronoun of either condescension or intimacy" (T) and "the pronoun of reverence or formality" (V). Brown and Gilman argue that modern usage no longer supports these definitions.
Modern history.
Developments from the nineteenth century have seen the solidarity semantic more consistently applied. It has become less acceptable for a more powerful individual to exercise the choice of pronoun. Officers in most armies are not permitted to address a soldier as T. Most European parents cannot oblige their children to use V. The relationships illustrated above have changed in the direction of the following norms:
The tendency to promote the solidarity semantic may lead to the abolition of any choice of address pronoun. During the French Revolution attempts were made to abolish V. In seventeenth century England the Society of Friends obliged its members to use only T to everyone, and some continue to use T ("thee") to one another. In most Modern English dialects the choice of T no longer exists outside of poetry.
Changes in progress.
It was reported in 2012 that use of the French form "vous" is in decline in social media . An explanation offered was that such online communications favour the philosophy of equality, regardless of usual formal distinctions. Similar tendencies were observed in German, Persian and Chinese as well as in Italian.
History of use in individual languages.
English.
The Old English and Early Middle English second person pronouns "thu" and "ye" (with variants) were used for singular and plural reference respectively with no T–V distinction. The earliest entry in the Oxford English Dictionary for "ye" as a V pronoun in place of the singular "thou" exists in a Middle English text of 1225 composed in 1200. The usage may have started among the French nobility in imitation of French. It made noticeable advances during the second half of the thirteenth century. During the sixteenth century, the distinction between the subject form "ye" and the object form "you" was largely lost, leaving "you" as the usual V pronoun (and plural pronoun). After 1600, the use of "ye" in standard English was confined to literary and religious contexts or as a consciously archaic usage .
David Crystal summarises Early Modern English usage thus:
V would normally be used
T would normally be used
The T–V distinction was still well preserved when Shakespeare began writing at the end of the sixteenth century. However, other playwrights of the time made less use of T–V contrasts than Shakespeare. The infrequent use of T in popular writing earlier in the century such as the Paston Letters suggest that the distinction was already disappearing from popular speech. In the first half of the seventeenth century, "thou" disappeared from Standard English, although the T–V distinction was preserved in many regional dialects. When the Quakers began using "thou" again in the middle of the century, many people were still aware of the old T–V distinction and responded with derision and physical violence.
In the nineteenth century, one aspect of the T–V distinction was restored to some English dialects in the form of a pronoun that expressed friendly solidarity, written as "y'all". Unlike earlier "thou" it was used for both singular and plural address. The pronoun was first observed in the southern states of the US among African-American speakers, although its precise origin is obscure. The pronoun spread rapidly to White speakers in those southern states, and (to a lesser extent) other regions of the US and beyond. This pronoun is not universally accepted, and may be regarded as either nonstandard or a regionalism.
French.
In Old French texts, the pronouns "tu" and "vous" are often used interchangeably to address an individual, sometimes in the same sentence. However, some emerging pattern of use has been detected by recent scholars. Between characters equal in age or rank, "vous" was more common than "tu" as a singular address. However, "tu" was sometimes used to put a young man in his place, or to express temporary anger. There may also have been variation between Parisian use and that of other regions.
In the Middle French period a relatively stable T–V distinction emerged. "Vous" was the V form used by upper-class speakers to address one another, while "tu" was the T form used among lower class speakers. Upper-class speakers could choose to use either T or V when addressing an inferior. Inferiors would normally use V to a superior. However, there was much variation; in 1596 Étienne Pasquier in his comprehensive survey "Recherches de la France" observed that the French sometimes used "vous" to inferiors as well as to superiors ""selon la facilité de nos naturels"" ("according to our natural tendencies"). In poetry, "tu" was often used to address kings or to speak to God.
Use of names.
The boundaries between formal and informal language differ from language to language, as well as within social groups of the speakers of a given language. In some circumstances, it is not unusual to call other people by first name and the respectful form, or last name and familiar form. For example, German teachers use the former construct with upper-secondary students, while Italian teachers typically use the latter (switching to a full V-form with university students). This can lead to constructions denoting an intermediate level of formality in T–V-distinct languages that sound awkward to English-speakers. For example, the catchphrase of "Be careful, Michael" from "Knight Rider" was usually dubbed ""Seien Sie vorsichtig, Michael"" in German, implying both formality (use of "Sie") and familiarity (use of first name). In Italian, "(Signor) Vincenzo Rossi" can be addressed with the tu (familiar) form or the Lei (formal) one, but complete addresses range from "Tu, Vincenzo" (peer to peer or family) and "Tu, Rossi" (teacher or fellow student to high-school student, as stated above) to "Lei, signor Vincenzo" (live-in servant to master or master's son) and "Lei, Rossi" (senior staff member to junior) and "Lei, signor Rossi" (peers' address).
Translation issues.
The use of these forms may be an issue for compensating translation of dialogue into English if the translator does not wish to use the "thou" pronoun to translate. For example, a character in a French film or novel saying ""Tutoie-moi!"" ("Use informal pronoun "tu" when addressing me!") might be translated "Do not be so formal!" or "Call me by my first name!"
Conversely, when translating from English to a T–V language, the translator must decide again and again throughout the work which second-person form the reader would deem the more appropriate in a given situation. In the current German DVD release of "Gone with the Wind", the translators of the dubbed soundtrack and of the subtitles sometimes make opposite decisions; the actors dubbed voices speak with the familiar form, while the subtitles for the same scene are more formal.
Singular, plural and other ways of distinction.
In many languages, the respectful singular pronoun derives from a plural form. Some Romance languages have familiar forms derived from the Latin singular "tu" and respectful forms derived from Latin plural "vos", sometimes via a circuitous route. Sometimes, singular V-form derives from a third person pronoun; in German and some Nordic languages, it is the third person "plural". Some languages have separate T and V forms for both singular and plural; others have the same form; others have a T–V distinction only in the singular.
Different languages distinguish pronoun uses in different ways. Even within languages, there are differences between groups (older people and people of higher status tending both to use and to expect more respectful language) and between various aspects of one language. For example, in Dutch, V form "u" is slowly falling into disuse in the plural, thus one could sometimes address a group as T form "jullie" (which clearly expresses the plural) when one would address each member individually as "u" (which has the disadvantage of being ambiguous). In Latin American Spanish, the opposite change has occurred – having lost the V form "vosotros", Latin Americans address all groups as "ustedes", even if the group is composed of friends whom they would call "tú" or "vos" (both T forms). In Standard Peninsular Spanish however, "vosotros" (literally, "you others") is still regularly employed in familiar conversation. In some cases V-forms are likely to be capitalized when written.
Table.
The following is a table of the nominative case of the singular and plural second person in many languages, including their respectful variants (if any):
In specific languages.
Germanic.
Afrikaans.
Modern Afrikaans rarely makes the distinction between the informal "jy" and "jou" ("you" subject and "your" / "you" object) and the more formal "u" (or "U" when addressing God), although sometimes it is upheld in a formal setting, such as in politics, business or in a polite conversation. The trend is moving towards using the informal pronoun most often.
Dutch.
Old Dutch did not appear to have a T–V distinction. "Thu" was used as the second-person singular, and "gi" as the second-person plural. In early Middle Dutch, influenced by Old French usage, the original plural pronoun "gi" (or "ji" in the north) came to be used as a respectful singular pronoun, creating a T–V distinction. However, the formal "gi" started to be used in more and more situations. By the 17th century, "du" had largely fallen out of use, although it lingered on in some of the more peripheral areas. At this point, the original T–V distinction had been lost, and the original V-pronoun "gij"/"jij" was used universally for both singular and plural regardless of the type of address. This resembled the state of English today, which has also (outside of dialectal, literary or religious use) lost its original T-pronoun "thou".
Around this time, a new formal pronoun "u" started to come into use. This was also the object form of the subject pronoun "gij"/"jij", and how it came to be used as a subject pronoun is not exactly clear. It is usually related to a form of address in writing of the time: letters were often addressed formally to "U.E.", standing for "Uwe Edelheid" ("Your Highness"), which is thought to have been shortened to "u" eventually. It can be compared to the Spanish "usted", which is a similar contraction of a phrase of indirect address. As in Spanish, the Dutch "u" was originally conjugated as the third person in verbs, although most verbs had identical second- and third-person singular forms, so that this difference was not apparent for the most part. It remains today in the use of "u heeft" ("you (formal) have", like "hij heeft" "he has"), compared to "jij hebt" ("you (informal) have"). However, "u hebt" is now also common.
Around the same time, it became more common to clarify when multiple people were being spoken to, by adding "luyden", "lieden", or a shortened variety, to the end of the pronoun. Thus, when speaking to multiple people, one would use "jij luyden" or "je lieden". This combination was contracted and fused over time, eventually resulting in "jullie", the informal plural pronoun that is used today. It can be compared, in its origin, to the English "y'all" or Spanish "vosotros".
Modern northern Dutch, and usually standard Dutch as well, has two forms of second person pronouns, namely "jij" and "u". "U" is the formal pronoun, whereas "jij" is used as the informal personal pronoun to address a single person. In the plural, "u" is also used, alongside the informal "jullie". In the south, only one pronoun, "gij", is generally used in all three roles: both singular and plural, formal and informal. "U" is sometimes also used in formal situations, but the southern "gij" does not have a distinct informal connotation like the northern/standard "jij", and can be used to address anyone without offence. Religious Dutch speakers in all areas address God using either "Gij" or "U"; "jij" is never used. For speakers of the north, this is usually the only place where "gij" is encountered, giving it a formal and archaic tone, even though it is neutral in the southern areas where it is still used.
The pronoun "je" (unstressed variant of "jij") can also be used impersonally, corresponding to the English generic you. The more formal Dutch term corresponding to English generic you or one is "men".
In Dutch the formal personal pronoun is used for older people or for people with a higher or equal status, unless the addressed makes it clear they want to be spoken to with the informal pronoun. Unlike for example in German, there is no defined line (in the case of German, roughly when someone passes the age of 16) in which everyone, apart from family, is addressed with the formal pronoun. Addressing parents by "u" has become very rare; "jij" is often even used to address grandparents. There is also a tendency towards more use of the informal pronoun. Some companies such as Ikea consciously address their customers with the informal "jij". However, "u" can still be considered more or less obligatory in situations where, for example, a pupil addresses his teacher, people testify in court or communication between a doctor and his patient.
English.
Old English used ' in the second-person singular for both formal and informal contexts. Following the Norman Conquest, the Middle English that emerged continued to use ' at first, but by the 13th century, Norman French influence had led to the use of the second-person plural ' or ' in formal contexts.
In Early Modern English superiors and strangers were therefore respectfully addressed as "ye" in the nominative and "you" in the objective; "thou" and "thee" were used for familiars and subordinates. The more widespread and observed this division became, the more pejorative it became to strangers to be called by the familiar form of address. By the 17th century, such a use among the nobility was strongly and deliberately contemptuous, as in the declamation of the prosecutor at Sir Walter Raleigh's 1603 trial "I thou thee, thou traitor!" Accordingly, the use of "thou" began to decline and it was effectively extinct in the everyday speech of most English dialects by the early 18th century, supplanted by the polite "you", even when addressing children and animals, something also seen in Dutch and Latin America (most of Brazil and parts of Spanish America). Meanwhile, as part of English's continuing development away from its synthetic origins since the influx of French vocabulary following the Norman invasion, "you" had been replacing "ye" since the 15th century. English was left with a single second-person pronoun for all cases, numbers and contexts and largely incapable of maintaining a T–V distinction.
Notwithstanding all of this, the translators of the King James version of the Bible chose to employ the older forms in their work (1604–1611) in order to convey the grammatical distinctions made by their Hebrew, Greek and Latin sources. Its subsequent popularity and the religious rationale of many who continued to employ "thou" has preserved its use in English, but made it seem pious and (ironically) "more" formal and respectful than the everyday "you".
Frisian.
In Frisian, the formal singular nominative "jo" (pronounced "yo") is very close to the English "you" and the Middle and Early Modern English "ye".
German.
"Sie" and "du".
In German, the formal address "Sie" is the same as the third person plural pronoun "sie". Verbs used with this form of address are also identical to third person plural forms. The polite form and its inflected forms are always capitalized in writing, to avoid any ambiguity.
The corresponding informal German address is "du". The verbs "duzen" and "siezen" mean respectively "to address using du" and "to address using Sie" and the phrases "per du" or "auf du und du" mean, "to be on du terms". The use of "Sie" often coincides with the use of the title plus surname, usage of which is more widespread in German-speaking areas than Anglophone areas. In general terms, "du" is used to children, animals and God, and between adults (or between adults and children) who are good friends of or closely related to each other. "Sie" is used in other situations, such as in a business situation or where there is no existing relationship. In Internet chats and forums, Germans rarely use "Sie", although there are exceptions. Except in the case of adults addressing children, where it is common for the child to address the adult as "Sie", but be addressed as "du" in return, it is not common in German for one party to address the other as "Sie", but be addressed as "du" in return. In almost all cases it can be considered as impolite to use the "wrong" pronoun, i. e. a pronoun that is not expected by the other party.
High school students in Germany are often called "Sie" plus given name ("Hamburger Sie") by their teachers when they enter the "Oberstufe" – the last 2 or 3 years of high school – around the age of 16.
Children and teenagers are expected to use "Sie" when addressing all adults except for family members and family friends whom they have known since early childhood. Street and similar social workers, sports clubs trainers will sometimes tell children and teens to address them with "du". In shops, bars, and other establishments, if they target a younger audience, it is becoming increasingly common for customers and staff to address each other as "du", to the degree that it is sometimes considered awkward if a waitress and a customer who are both in their twenties call each other "Sie".
The use of "du" or "Sie" between two strangers may also be determined by the setting in which they meet (casual/formal), as well as clothing (casual/formal), gender (same/opposite), and personal preference. For example, it is customary to use "du" in traditional small pubs and taverns in certain regions (including the Rhineland). This applies also to older people, whom one would otherwise address as "Sie". Two people who addressed each other as "du" in a pub may go back to "Sie" when they meet in the street if their acquaintance was only very superficial. During the famous Rhenish carnival, it is customary for most revelers to address each other as "du". Only if the age difference is more than one generation, the younger person might still use "Sie". Another setting in which "du" is often used between adults is sporting events. As a learned social trait, one person would normally use "Sie", while he or she asks the other person if it is acceptable to be addressed informally, and then act accordingly.
Being "per du" has also become increasingly common in workplace environments (depending on the line of business and corporate culture to varying degrees), mostly regardless of age. In such environments, the "du" basis may also be observed as a (sometimes necessary) mark of good social integration within a working group. As a rule of thumb, one might expect to see team colleagues on the workplace level in many industries on a customary "du" basis with each other, though not always with the group manager and more rarely with higher-ranking managers. As entrants to a team are more closely integrated, this is often marked by making an informal affirmation to that basis or by formally offering it, as a matter of style and habituality. Both the tempo and extent of using the "du" basis depends much on the culture (and sometimes the climate) of the business, and in some places even more so on that of the particular workgroup itself. Business cultures that pride themselves on a "flat hierarchy" are more likely to adopt or accent a general professional parlance of "du" and given name while inside corporations tending to emphasize professional formality, a "Sie" may be expected to be used always except between very close colleagues or inside closed groups (sometimes including managers meeting on the same level with the exclusion of any subordinates), and strictly always in the presence of a superior. The superior, on the other hand, has the right to address the other perform informally or formally, which is a personal preference.
Customarily, the switch from "Sie" to "du" is initially proposed by the elder of the two people, the person with socially higher standing or by the lady to the gentleman. One way to propose the use of "du" rather than "Sie" is by stating one's first name (as in: "Ich heiße..."). One accepts the proposal by introducing one's own first name. Should a person later forget that they have adopted "du", it is polite to remind them by saying, "Wir waren doch per du" (We moved on to 'du' terms). Sometimes switching back to "Sie" is used as a method of distancing oneself from the addressee; the connotation is slightly ironic courtesy. In Germany, an old custom (called "Bruderschaft trinken", drinking brotherhood) involves two friends formally sharing a bottle of wine or drinking a glass of beer together to celebrate their agreement to call one another "du" rather than "Sie". This custom has also been adopted among the Swiss-French of the Jura, in Poland and Russia (called by its German name, spelled "bruderszaft" and "брудершафт" respectively), though the custom in Poland is now slowly disappearing. It was formerly found also in Sweden.
Although the use of "Sie" generally coincides with the use of title plus surname, especially in northern and eastern Germany, there is an intermediate address combining "Sie" with the first name ("Hamburger Sie"), whereas in the Berlin region, sometimes "Du" is combined with the surname ("Berliner Du"). The former usage also occurs when addressing teenagers, household staff, or guests of TV or radio programs, while the latter style is usually considered inferior and mainly occurs in working class environments. It may be associated with professional contexts, when colleagues have known one another for a long time, but, e. g. due to differences of status, do not want to switch to the usual "Du" style; or in situations where strangers (e.g. customers) are present for whom it would not be appropriate to learn the first name of the addressee.
When speaking to more than one person in formal situations, "Sie" is used in standard German, although "ihr" can often be heard instead, especially in the South of Germany. Usage varies when addressing a group containing both "du" and "Sie" persons from the speaker's point of view. Some speakers use the informal plural "ihr", others prefer the formal "Sie" and many, concerned that both pronouns might cause offence, prefer to use circumlocutions that avoid either pronoun.
Historical predecessors: "Ihr" and "Er/Sie".
Formerly, the 2nd person plural "Ihr" ("ye") was used to address social superiors, unless more informal relations had been established. "Ihr" in this case has to be capitalized. However, Ihr itself shows a degree of informality, and would for example be used in addressing one's father. For the formal address, the third person would be used; and this in the singular with Er, Sie (capitalized) to a social inferior, as a farmer addressing a stableboy, or in the plural to a social superior. It is from the latter occurrences that modern "Sie" takes its origin; "Sie" is the 3rd person plural pronoun. However, "Sie" itself is relatively young, and it was rather the formal addresses, often itself singular forms, that took the plural. Even as late as in Dürrenmatt's "The Visit" (written in 1956), an address "Das wissen Herr Bürgermeister schon" ("You do know that, Mr. Mayor", modern German would just say "Das wissen Sie schon") can be found; Herr Bürgermeister is the formal address and itself a singular term, but wissen is plural. However, if the formal address itself contains a personal pronoun as in "Seine Majestät" (His Majesty) etc., this one would be put to the 2nd person plural: "Was geruhen Euer (not: Seine) Majestät zu befehlen?" ("What does plural Your Majesty condescend to order?")
Thus, all these go by a similar grammar rule pertaining to the verb used with these addresses as modern "Sie". The dated capitalized address "Ihr" demands the same verb form as the modern second person plural pronoun "ihr", the dated "Er/Sie" demands the same verb form as the modern third person singular "er" and "sie", and the dated 3rd person plural address without "Sie" demands, just as "Sie" itself, the same verb form as the 3rd person plural pronoun "sie" (they).
The forms are still found today in some dialects as a respectful way of addressing elders, and is still very often found in works of art and literature (such as books and movies) depicting events at least several centuries in the past, or in a "past-like" fantasy setting, even if modern German is otherwise used in these works; indeed, using the modern "Sie" in such a setting would be considered an out-of-place anachronism. "Ihr" and the 3rd person plural without "Sie" is somewhat analogous to the English majestic plural.
The "Er, Sie" form is not widely known or understood by the average person any more. While "Ihrzen" is often still used in dubbed films, especially in medieval/fantasy contexts such as Lord of the Rings e.g. " "Ihr" habt das Reich der Herrin des Waldes betreten, "Ihr" könnt nicht umkehren." In English: "you have entered the Realm of the Lady of the Wood, you can not turn back". In this context, a historical level is used where the second person plural indicates some nobility of or respect for the addressee, such that from "Ihr" being used to address a single person, the viewer could mostly, without looking, conclude that the person was of elevated rank such as a king or nobleman, or at least being treated with expressed regard. "Ihr" would not normally be used to address a peasant (unless he is a prince in disguise or a future prince and the person addressing him has gathered some knowledge or presumption of that).
Scandinavian languages.
Danish.
In Danish, the informal second-person singular is ' and the formal form of address uses the third-person plural ', capitalized to distinguish it from its other use. The second-person plural "I" and the third-person singular "han" ("he") or "hun" ("she") were sometimes used until the early 19th century in standard Danish and awhile longer in the countryside. The German-inspired form "De" entered Danish in the 18th century, too late to enter liturgical use. In church, as in rural or dialect-speaking areas, "du" has always been the universal form, especially in egalitarian Jutland.
As with other Scandinavian languages, even among the prestige dialects, the formal pronoun is waning in use in the case of Danish, since the "Ungdomsoprøret" ("Youth Revolts") during and after the protests of 1968. As a general rule, the informal "du" is accepted everywhere today, except when addressing royalty or during military service. In other contexts, it has come to seem excessively formal and old-fashioned to most Danes. Even at job interviews and among parliamentarians, "du" has become standard.
In written Danish, "De" remains current in legal, legislative, and formal business documents, as well as in some translations from other languages. This is sometimes audience-dependent, as in the Danish government's general use of "du" except in healthcare information directed towards the elderly, where "De" is still used. Other times, it is maintained as an affectation, as by the staff of some formal restaurants, the "Weekendavisen" newspaper, TV 2 announcers, and the avowedly conservative Maersk corporation. Attempts by other corporations to avoid sounding either stuffy or too informal by employing circumlocutions using passive phrasing or using the pronoun "man" ("one") have generally proved awkward and been ill-received, and (with the notable exception of the national railway DSB) most have opted for the more personable "du" form.
Icelandic.
Modern Icelandic is the Scandinavian dialect closest to Old Norse, which made a distinction between the plural "þér" and the dual "þið". This distinction continued in written Icelandic the early 1920 when the plural "þér" was also used on formal occasions. The formal usage of "þér" seems to have pushed the dual "þið" to take over the plural so modern Icelandic normally uses "þið" as a plural. However, in formal documents such as by the president "þér" is still used as plural, and the usage of þér as plural and þið as dual is still retained in the Icelandic translation of the Christian scriptures. There are still a number of fixed expressions particularly religious adages such as "seek and ye shall find" ("leitið og þér munuð finna") and the formal pronoun is sometimes used in translations from a language that adheres to a T–V distinction, but otherwise it appears only when one wants to be excessively formal either from the gravity of the occasion (as in court proceedings and legal correspondence) or out of contempt (in order to ridicule another person's self-importance), and "þú" is used in all other cases.
Norwegian.
In Norwegian, the polite form "De"/"Dem" (Bokmål) and "De"/"Dykk" (Nynorsk) has more or less disappeared in both spoken and written language. Norwegians now exclusively use "du", and the polite form does not have a strong cultural pedigree in the country. Until recently, "De" would sometimes be found in written works, business letters, plays and translations where an impression of formality must be retained. The popular belief that "De" is reserved for the king is incorrect, since according to royal etiquette, the King (and other members of the royal family) will be referred to as "Deres majestet" (bokmål)/"Dykkar majestet" (nynorsk) (Your majesty) or in third person singular as "Hans majestet" (His majesty), "Hennes majestet" (Her majesty), "Kongen" (the King), "Dronningen" (the Queen) and similar.
Norwegians generally refer to one another by first name only, unless the person is better known by full or last name only. This also contributes to the weakening of these pronouns and a general pattern of declining use of polite speech. For example, a student might address his professor by his first name, but would refer to a leading politician by his last name. Norwegian politicians and celebrities are sometimes referred to by their first names, especially in newspaper headlines, while the text of the article most likely would use the person's last name. Nicknames are not very common.
The distinction between Bokmål and Nynorsk exists primarily for written Norwegian (most Norwegians speak dialects that differ from the standard written forms), and the T–V rules are the same for both forms—except that Bokmål uses the third person plural to indicate politeness (as in German), while Nynorsk uses the second person plural (as in French). In both forms, when these pronouns are used to indicate politeness, they are always capitalised (to show deference, and separate them from when they indicate, respectively, the third and second person plural).
Swedish.
In Swedish, there has in the last two centuries been a marked difference between usage in Finland Swedish and in Sweden.
In the Swedish of Sweden, the polite "Ni" was known from earlier epochs, but had come to be considered somewhat careless, bullying or rude; instead, an intricate system had evolved in order to prudently step around pronouns almost altogether.
Parts of this system began to erode around the Second World War or so, but the essentials held up into the 1960s.
As the twentieth century progressed, this circumlocutive system of addressing, with its innumerable ambiguities and opportunities for unintentional offence, was increasingly felt as a nuisance. In the sixties, the so-called du-reformen ('thou-reform') was carried out. First, authorities and influential circles tried rehabilitating the "Ni" in a so-called ""ni" reform"—but most people could not bring themselves to feel civil using that. Then, almost overnight and dubbed the ""du" reform", the system broke down, and "du" (noted as informal above) became the accepted way of addressing any one person except royalty.
Addressing royalty went somewhat more slowly from a universal "Ers majestät" ('Your Majesty'), etc., to that address only on formal occasions, otherwise replaced by third person (singular if the addressee is single) with title ("K(on)ungen" 'the King', etc.).
These rules still apply, with marginal exceptions. The vast majority of Swedes, including younger people in most or all situations, stick to the "du". In order to "alleviate the intrusion" in writing, e.g. in letters or in advertisement, the "Du" can be capitalized. That usage was most widespread in the early days of universal "du" address; it has become slightly more common again simultaneously with the partial "Ni" revival.
Finland Swedish has undergone a similar development to mainland Swedish since the 1960s, but slower and slightly less. There, one may have to reckon with influence from the Finnish language, still slightly more conservative.
In Finland Swedish, the second person plural form "Ni" (noted as formal above) was indeed the traditional respectful address to a single person up to the 1970s or so.
Swedish, also, has verbs for the addresses: "dua" 'to say "du" ', and "nia" 'to say "ni" '.
Scots.
In Modern Scots the second person singular nominative "thoo" (, Southern Scots , Shetlandic ) survived in colloquial speech until the mid 19th century in most of lowland Scotland. It has since been replaced by "ye"/"you" in most areas except in Insular Scots where "thee" (, Shetlandic ) is also used, in North Northern Scots and in some Southern Scots varieties. "Thoo" is used as the familiar form by parents speaking to children, elders to youngsters, or between friends or equals. The second person formal singular "ye" or "you" is used when speaking to a superior or when a youngster addresses an elder. The older second person singular possessive "thy" (), and "thee" (, Shetlandic along with "thine"("s") ) still survive to some extent where "thoo" remains in use.
Yiddish.
Yiddish makes use of the second person plural form as the polite form for both singular and plural. In the second person plural form ', there is therefore no distinction between formal and informal forms. There is a dialectal pronoun ' strictly for informal second-person plural form, but this pronoun is rarely used today and is only found in some dialects of Poland and neighboring regions.
Given that old German dialects were the main influence on the development of the Yiddish language, this form may be recognized with older polite forms of the German language.
Romance languages.
French.
In most French-speaking regions (Canada is an exception; see "North American French" below), a rigid T–V distinction is upheld. With regard to the second person singular, "tu" is used informally, whereas "vous" is used to convey formality. (The second person plural is always "vous".) The formal "vous" is expected when encountering any unknown adult under normal circumstances. In general, the switch from "vous" to "tu" is "negotiated" on a case-by-case basis; it can happen nearly unconsciously, or can be explicitly negotiated. For instance, some couples have been known to call each other "vous" for some time while dating, and gradually switch to calling each other "tu". The verb "tutoyer" means "address someone with "tu"-forms, speak informally"; by contrast "vouvoyer" means "address someone with "vous" forms". Rigidly sticking to "vous" can become equally awkward in a long-standing relationship.
In certain circumstances, however, "tu" is used more broadly. For example, new acquaintances who are conscious of having something socially significant in common (e.g., student status, or the same "rank" in some hierarchy) often use "tu" more or less immediately. In some cases, there may be an explicitly defined practice in a particular company, political party, as to the use of "tu" and "vous". Also, using the "vous" in conjunction with someone's given name is rather current in France as a less formal way of addressing someone, e.g. at work, among members of an association etc. Children and adolescents generally use "tu" to speak with someone of their own age, whether known or not. "Tu" can also be used to show disrespect to a stranger, such as when surprising a thief or cursing other drivers on the road.
"Vous" may be used to distance oneself from a person one does not want to interact with. Additionally, two people who use "tu" in their private interactions may consciously switch back to "vous" in public in order to act appropriately in a formal or professional environment, to play the part in an artificially constructed situation (e.g., co-hosts of a television show), or simply to conceal the nature of their relationship from others.
In families, "vous" was traditionally used to address older family members. Children were taught to use "vous" to address their parents, and "vous" was used until about 1950 between spouses of the higher classes. Former president Jacques Chirac and his wife Bernadette are a prominent example of the continuation of this usage.
When praying, "tu" is nowadays often used in addressing the deity, though "vous" was used in Catholic prayers until the Second Vatican Council, and is still used to address the Blessed Virgin Mary. In Louisiana, however, "vous" is always used to convey a sense of respect and reverence when praying.
In Walloon, the use of which tends, in any case, to be restricted mostly to "familiar" contexts, "vos" (="vous") is the general usage and is considered informal and friendly. "Ti" (="tu"), on the other hand, is considered vulgar, and its use can be taken as an expression of an aggressive attitude towards the person addressed. This influence from Walloon affects the usage of "tu" and "vous" in the French spoken in Belgium, though more so among people accustomed to using Walloon as their everyday language (a tiny minority, mostly in the countryside). The influence of Standard French, particularly as exercised through the mass media, is eroding this particularity among younger French-speakers.
North American French.
North American dialects of French, including Quebec French and Acadian French as well as Louisiana French, permit and expect a far broader usage of the familiar "tu" than in Standard French. There are still circumstances in which it is necessary to say "vous": in a formal interview (notably for a job) or when addressing people of very high rank (such as judges or prime ministers), senior citizens, between professors and students in universities, towards customers or new acquaintances in a formal setting. As acquaintances become familiar with one another, they may find "vous" to be unnecessarily formal and may agree to return to the "tu" with which they are generally more comfortable.
For a number of Francophones in Canada, "vous" sounds stilted or snobbish, and archaic. "Tu" is by no means restricted to intimates or social inferiors. There is however an important minority of people, often those who call for a use of standard French in Quebec, who prefer to be addressed as "vous". At Radio-Canada (the public broadcaster, often considered as establishing the normative objectives of standard French in Canada), the use of "vous" is widespread even among colleagues.
Catalan.
Catalan uses the singular pronouns "tu" (informal) and "vostè" (formal), while "vosaltres" (informal) and "vostès" (formal) are used to refer to two or more addressees. The form "vós", used instead of "tu" to address someone respectfully, follows the same concordance rules as the French "vous" (verbs in second person plural, adjectives in singular), and "vostè" follows the same concordance rules as the Spanish "usted" (verbs in 3rd person). "Vostè" originated from "vostra mercè" as a calque from Spanish, and replaced the original Catalan form "vós".
In some dialects of Catalan, "vós" is no longer used. Other dialects have a three-way distinction "tu/vós/vostè", where "vostè" is used as a respectful form for elders and respected friends, and "vós" for foreigners and people whom one does not know well. "Vostè" is more distant than "vós".
Administration uses "vós" for address to people.
Spanish.
In Peninsular, Mexican, and Peruvian Spanish, as in Italian, an original "tú" and "vos" usage similar to French disappeared in the Early Modern period. Today, "tú" is used for informal and familiar address while the respectful form is the third-person "usted", which can be used to reference anyone in a respectful manner. Scholars argue that "usted" evolved as a contraction of the Old Spanish "Vuestra Merced", which translates as "your mercy", and evolved into "vusted". In some cases, the title "Don" is also employed when speaking to a respected older man, while "Doña" is used for older women.
Among Spanish dialects, the situation is muddied by the kingdom's former empire having been created during the middle of this linguistic shift. The area around Colombia's capital Bogotá (although not the city itself) preserve an alternate respectful form "sumercé" simplified from a different contraction of "vuestra merced". In Rioplatense, "vos" was preserved but as a replacement for "tú" and not as a respectful form of address; in Chile, in Western Venezuela, parts of Colombia and in Central America, "vos" is used in spoken address and "tú" is used in print and to express moderate formality, that is, it has essentially switched its function to "vos"'s former role.
In the second-person plural, modern Spanish speakers in most of Iberia employ "vosotros" informally and (as the third-person plural) "ustedes" to express respect. In western Andalucia, "ustedes" is used in both contexts, but its verbs are conjugated in the second-person plural. Throughout the Americas and the Canaries, "ustedes" is used in all contexts and in the third person.
Portuguese.
European Portuguese.
In European Portuguese (as well as in Africa, PALOP, and Asia, Timor-Leste and Macau), "tu" (singular "you") is commonly used as the familiar addressing pronoun, while "você" is a general form of address; "vocês" (plural both of "tu" and "você") is used for both familiar and general. The forms "o senhor" and "a senhora" (plurals "os senhores" and "as senhoras") are used for more formal situations (roughly equivalent to "Mr/Sir" and "Mrs/Madam".) Similarly to some Romance languages (e.g. Italian), "tu" can be omitted because the verb ending provides the necessary information. Not so much so with "você" or "o senhor" / "a senhora" because the verb ending is the same as for the third person (historically, "você" derives from "vossa mercê" ("your mercy" or "your grace") via the intermediate forms "vossemecê" and "vosmecê"). The second person plural pronoun "vós", from Latin "vos", is archaic in most of the Portuguese-speaking world, but can be heard in liturgy and has a limited regional use.
Brazilian Portuguese.
In Brazilian Portuguese, "você" and "vocês" (singular and plural "you", respectively) are used informally, while "o senhor" and "a senhora" ("Mr"/"Sir" and "Mrs"/"Madam", plurals "os senhores" and "as senhoras") are used in formal speech. Although now seen as archaic, "a senhorita" is used when speaking ironically, very formally or when one is demonstrating respect to a superior and it is sometimes replaced by "moça" ("Lady"). Informal terms of respect to superiors, elders or strangers are "seu" (abbreviation of "senhor"), "sua" (feminine of "seu"), "Dona" (feminine of "Dom" i.e. "Don") and "madame" ("Ma'am"). "Moço/rapaz" and "moça" ("Lad"/"Young man" and "Lady") are used by seniors when addressing non-intimate youths and also as an equalizing form among strange youths. "Jovem" ("youngster") is used in the same manner by elders when addressing strange youths of both genders.
On premises where the atmosphere requires extreme formality like the Senate or different courts, the protocolar forms to address dignitaries "Vossa Excelência" ("Your Excellence") and "Vossa Senhoria" ("Your Lordship/Ladyship") can still be heard. In a direct address to a judge or the president, "Vossa Excelência" must follow the vocatives "Meritíssimo/a" ("Your Honour". Literally "full of merit") and "Sr/Sra Presidente" ("Mr/Mrs" President). When addressing an ecclesiastical dignitary the form "Vossa Reverência" ("Your Reverence") is used. Although "Vossa Senhoria" is regarded as protocolar, it is an equalizing form.
In many parts of the geographic extension of the language e.g. most of Southern and Northeastern Brazil, some sociolects of coastal São Paulo, mainly in Greater Santos, colloquial "carioca" sociolect, mainly among the less educated and some all-class youths of Greater Rio de Janeiro, and in Uruguay, "tu" (singular "you" or simply "thou") is used informally, but the plural form is always "vocês". For the overwhelmingly majority of people, the pronoun "tu" is commonly used with the verb conjugated as "você" (third-person singular) rather than in the expected conjugation (second-person singular). "Tu" is somewhat familiar, even intimate, and should never be addressed to superiors, or strange elders, while "você" is much more neutral, although equalizing.
The dialect that includes Florianópolis, capital city of Santa Catarina, as well as its shore and inner regions in the proximity like Blumenau, is an exception, as the use of "tu" is widespread, even addressing formally to an authority or to a superior. It is one of the few dialects in Brazil in which second-person singular agreement is used (along with the relatively conservative dialect of the state of Maranhão).
Italian.
In Standard Italian the informal second-person singular pronoun is "tu" and the formal second-person singular pronoun is "Lei" (inf. "she", lit. "her"), always used with the third-person singular conjugation of the verb. The pronouns may be freely omitted. Despite "lei"'s original meaning, modern Italian typically concords with the gender of the addressee; using feminine adjectives for a male addressee is not especially insulting but sounds confusing, literary or even archaic.
"Lei" is normally used in formal settings or with strangers, although it implies a sense of distance (even coldness) similar to the French use of "vous". Presently Italian adults prefer to employ "tu" towards strangers until around 30 years old. It is used reciprocally between adults; the usage may not be reciprocal when young people address older strangers or otherwise respected people. Students are addressed with "tu" by their teachers until the end of high school with few exceptions and usually with "Lei" in universities. Students might use "tu" with their teachers in elementary school, but switch to "Lei" from middle school. "Tu" is the common form of address on the Internet and within some professions such as journalism and law as a recognition of comradeship. In the law however the "tu" is only used in informal settings; in the courtroom it is used only to small children, if ever any happens to appear there.
The second-person plural pronoun is "voi". Its polite counterpart was formerly "Loro" ("They"), but it is now little used outside of self-consciously formal situations such as expensive restaurants. "Voi" is the traditional polite form of address in Tuscan dialects: Dante employs it in his 14th-century "Divine Comedy" when showing particular respect. "Lei" began to replace it during the Renaissance and then, under Spanish influence, it became common to contract obsequious honorifics such as "Your Lordship", "Eminence", and "Majesty", all of which are feminine third-person singular nouns in Italian ("Vostra Signoria", "Eminenza", "Maestà"). Over the next four centuries, all three pronouns "tu", "Voi", "Lei" were employed together to express degrees of formality and status, as displayed in Manzoni's 19th-century "The Betrothed". "Voi" continues to be used by some speakers, particularly of Southern dialects, as an alternative to "Lei" in polite address, but its use is increasingly uncommon. The use of "Voi" was imposed by the Fascists from 1938 to 1944. "Voi" still appears in instruction books and advertisements where "Lei" would sound too distant, but most of the time it is used directly as a plural and not as a polite singular.
Although seldom encountered, the third person "la Signoria Vostra" or "la S.V." ("Your Lord-" or "Ladyship") is sometimes seen in formal correspondence and invitations, as a stronger form of its descendant "lei".
Romanian.
Romanian "dumneavoastră" when used for the second-person singular formal takes plural verbs but singular adjectives, similar to French "vous." It is used roughly in the same manner as in Continental French and shows no signs of disappearing. It is also used as a more formal "voi." It originates from "domnia voastră" – your lordship. As happens with all subject pronouns, "dumneavoastră" is often omitted from sentences, its use being implied by verbs in the second person plural form.
The form "dumneata" (originating from "domnia ta" – thy lordship) is less distant than "dumneavoastră" and somewhat midway between "tu" and "dumneavoastră." The verb is conjugated, as for "tu," in the second person singular form. Older people towards younger people and peers favor "dumneata". Its use is gradually declining.
A more colloquial form of "dumneata" is "mata" or even "matale" or "tălică." It is more familiar than "tu" and is used only in some regions of Romania. It is used only with immediate family members, and is spelled and pronounced the same in all cases, similar to "dumneavoastră." It is used with verbs in the second person singular, as is "tu."
The plural form is a recent borrowing. Old Romanian and Arumanian, like Classical Latin, do not have the plural form.
Hellenic.
Ancient and Hellenistic or Koine Greek.
In Ancient Greek, "sý" (σύ) was the singular, and "hymeis" (ὑμεῖς) the plural, with no distinction for honorific or familiar. Paul addresses King Agrippa II as "sý" (Acts 26:2).
Later, "hymeís" and "hēmeís" (ἡμεῖς) ("we") became too close in pronunciation, and a new plural "seís" or "eseís" (σεις/εσείς) was invented, the initial "e" (ε) being a euphonic prefix that was also extended to the singular ("sý/esý").
Modern Greek.
In Modern Greek, εσείς ("eseís", second person plural) with second person plural verb conjugation is used as the formal counterpart of εσύ ("esý", second person singular) when talking to strangers and elders, although in everyday life it is common to speak to strangers of your age or younger using the singular pronoun. In addition, the informal second person singular is used even with older people you are acquainted with, depending on the level of mutual familiarity.
Since the formal εσείς ("eseís") has become less common outside schools and workplaces, many people often do not know which form to use (because using a formal version might sound too snobbish even to an elder and using the informal version might sound inappropriate to some strangers) and thus prefer to replace verbs with nouns (avoiding the dilemma) until enough information on the counterpart's intentions is gathered in order to choose between formal or informal second person pronoun and verb conjugation. A good rule of thumb is that singular accompanies first names and plural accompanies surnames with title (Mr, Mrs, etc.). Exceptions are rare, for example younger schoolchildren may address their teacher in the plural, title and "first name", or an officer may address a soldier in the singular and surname. The sequence singular-title-surname is a faux pas that can often indicate lack of education, of good manners, or of both.
The modern social custom when using the Greek language in Greece is to ask the other person "may we speak in the singular?" in which the other person is expected to answer "yes" and afterwards the discussion continues using the informal "εσύ" ("esý"); it is unthinkable for the other person to answer "no" or show preference for plural forms, and for this reason one should not even ask this question to a person of high status, such as a professional. Therefore, asking this question can itself be considered a form of disrespect in some social situations. Likewise, not asking this question and simply using the singular without prior explicit or implicit agreement would also be considered disrespectful in various social contingencies. In other cases, even using the formal plural (without a question) could also be considered offensive. A person being inappropriately addressed in the singular will often indicate their displeasure by insisting on responding in the plural, in a display of irony that may or may not be evident to the other party. A similar social custom exists with the words "κύριε" (Mr/Sir) and "κυρία" (Mrs/Madam), which can show both respect and a form of "mock respect" essentially communicating disapproval, often depending on the voice intonation and the social situation. Overall, the distinction between formal and informal forms of address and when to use each can be quite subtle and not easily discernible by a non-native speaker.
Cypriot Greek traditionally had no T–V distinction, with even persons of very high social status addressed in the singular, usually together with an honorific or title such as "δάσκαλε" ("teacher", mainly for priests) or "μάστρε "(literally "master", loosely "sir"). Even today, the singular form is used much more frequently in Cyprus compared to Greece, although this is changing under the influence of Standard Modern Greek. The plural form is now expected in a formal setting.
Celtic.
Scottish Gaelic.
In Scottish Gaelic, the informal form of the second-person singular is "thu"/"tu" (emphatic: "thusa"/"tusa"), used when addressing a person the speaker knows well, or when addressing a person younger or relatively the same age as the speaker. When addressing a superior, an elder, or a stranger, or in conducting business, the form "sibh" (emphatic: "sibhse") is used. ("Sibh" is also the second person plural). This distinction carries over into prepositional pronouns: for instance, "agad" and "agaibh" (at you), "riut" and "ruibh" (with you), "umad" and "umaibh" (about you), etc., and into possessive pronouns "do" and "ur" (your).
Irish.
In Irish, the use of "sibh" as an address to one person has died out, and "tú" is preferred. Formerly, Roman Catholic priests were addressed with the plural form "sibh", especially in Ulster, due to the possibility that the priest may be carrying the Eucharist on his person—belief in the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist would require the use of the plural.
Welsh, Cornish and Breton.
Modern Welsh, Cornish and Breton all retain a T–V distinction to varying degrees.
In spoken Welsh, the plural pronoun "chi" is used when speaking to strangers, elders or superiors, while "ti" (or "chdi" in some parts of the North) is used with friends, close family, animals and children. "Ti" is also the form used when addressing God. Nonetheless, the use of "chi" and "ti" varies between families and regions, but those guidelines are generally observed.
"Chwi" is an alternative to "chi" found in very formal literary language. Alongside the usages explained above, those born before 1945 would, in their youth, use "chi" with a girl of about the same age. Similarly to Italian, the third person singular is used by some speakers in the former Dyfed region of west Wales; it appears, however, that the pronoun used - between either "ef" or "e" (masculine) and "hi" (feminine) - depends on the gender of the listener.
A similar distinction exists between Cornish singular "ty / chy" and plural "hwi / whi". The singular form is used when talking to friends, family, animals and children, and the plural form is used to talk to a group of people, or when being especially polite to one person.
In Breton the second person plural "c'hwi" is used as a polite form when addressing a single person and the singular "te" is reserved for informal situations. However, in a large area of central Brittany the singular form has been entirely replaced by "c'hwi", as in English.
Balto-Slavic.
Russian.
Modern Russian distinguishes between the familiar ty ("ты") and the respectful vy ("вы"), the latter also being the plural of both forms. (Respectful "Vy" ("Вы") may be capitalised in written correspondence, while plural "vy" is not.) The distinction appeared relatively recently and began to gain currency among the educated classes in the 18th century through French influence.
Generally, "ty" is used among friends and relatives, but the usage depends not only on the closeness of the relationship but also on age and the formality of the situation (e.g., work meeting vs. a party). Children always use "ty" to address each other and are addressed in this way by adults but are taught to address adults with "vy". Younger adults typically also address older adults outside the family as "vy" regardless of intimacy, and may be addressed as "ty" in return. When talking to each other young people often start with the formal "vy" but may transition to "ty" very quickly in an informal situation. Among older people, "ty" is often reserved for closer acquaintances. Unless there is a substantial difference in age, the choice of the form is symmetric: if A uses "ty" to address B, then B also uses "ty" to address A. While people may transition quickly from "vy" to "ty", such transition presumes mutual agreement. Use of "ty" without consent of the other person is likely to be viewed as poor conduct or even as an insult (or, in the case of opposite-sexed people, overly flirtatious), particularly if the other party maintains using "vy".
Historically, the rules used to be more class-specific: as late as at the end of the 19th century, it was accepted in some circles (in aristocracy and especially gentry) that "vy" was to be used also between friends, between husband and wife, and when addressing one's parents (but not one's children), all of which situations today would strongly call for using "ty". Meanwhile, up to this day, common people, especially those living in rural areas, hardly ever use the polite "vy". Russian speakers online uphold the distinction and use "vy" for strangers.
The choice between "ty" and "vy" is closely related to, yet sometimes different from, the choice of the addressing format – that is, the selection from the first name, patronymics, last name, and the title to be used when addressing the person. Normally, "ty" is associated with the informal addressing by first name only (or, even more informally, by the patronymic only), whereas "vy" is associated with the more formal addressing format of using the first name together with patronymics (roughly analogous to "title followed by last name" in English) or the last name together with a title (the last name is almost never used together with either of the other two names to "address" someone, although such combinations are routinely used to "introduce" or "mention" someone). However, nowadays, "vy" can also be employed while addressing by first name only.
Serbo-Croatian.
In all standard forms of Serbo-Croatian, i.e. Serbian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Bosnian, the use of "ti" is limited to friends and family, and used among children. In any formal use, "vi", the second-person plural, is used only; "ti" can be used among peers in a workplace but is rare in official documents. It is a common misconception, even among native speakers, that "vi" is always capitalized when used in formal tone; "Vi" is capitalized only in direct personal correspondence between two persons.
With the polite "vi", masculine plural (in participles and adjectives) is used regardless of the sex of the person addressed.
Bulgarian.
Bulgarian distinguishes between familiar "ti" ("ти") and respectful "Vie" ("Вие"). "Ti" is always singular and implies familiarity. "Vie", the plural of "ti", also functions as the formal singular.
When referring to more than one person, the plural "vie" is always used. For example, ""Вие" двамата напуснете, моля!" means ""You" two leave, please!"). Here, although "ti" and "vie" both means "you", "ti" can not be used.
When addressing a single person, if the people talking are acquainted then singular "ti" is used, otherwise plural "Vie" should be used. Sometimes people start a new acquaintance straightforwardly with singular "ti", but generally this is considered offensive, rude, or simply impolite. Children are taught to always use "ti" between themselves, but "Vie" for addressing more than one child or an unknown adult.
The grammatically correct spelling of the singular word "Vie" is always with capital "V", whether being the first word in a sentence or not. For example, the sentence "But "you" are wrong!", if spelled (in Bulgarian) "Но "Вие" грешите!" (the word "Вие" with capital "В"), it would convey that the speaker is addressing an individual person with a plural, because he/she wants to express a polite, official manner; if spelt "Но "вие" грешите!" (the second possible Bulgarian translation of "But "you" are wrong!"), it would then mean that someone is talking to several persons.
Generally, "ti" is used among friends and relatives. When talking to each other, young people often start with the formal "vie" but quickly transition to "ti" in an informal situation. Unless there is a substantial difference in social situation (e.g. a teacher and a student), the choice of the form is symmetric: if A. uses "ti" to address B., then B. also uses "ti" to address A. While people may transition quickly from "vie" to "ti", such transition presumes mutual agreement. There is a recent trend not to use the formal "Vie" at all, but this can lead to awkward situations.
Macedonian.
Macedonian distinguishes between familiar "ti" (ти) and respectful "vie" (вие) — which is also the plural of both forms, used to address a pair or group. (Respectful "Vie" may be capitalized, while plural "vie" is not.) Generally, "ti" is used among friends and relatives, but the usage depends not only on the closeness of the relationship but also on age and the formality of the situation (e.g., work meeting vs. a party). Children always use "ti" to address each other and are addressed in this way by adults, but are taught to address adults with "vie". Younger adults typically also address older adults outside the family as "vie" regardless of intimacy, and may be addressed as "ti" in return. When talking to each other young people often start with the formal "vie", but may transit to "ti" very quickly in an informal situation. Among older people, "ti" is often reserved for closer acquaintances. Unless there is a substantial difference in age, the choice of the form is symmetric: if A uses "ti" to address B, then B also uses "ti" to address A. While people may transit quickly from "vie" to "ti", such transition presumes mutual agreement. Use of "ti" without consent of the other person is likely to be viewed as poor conduct or even as an insult, particularly if the other party maintains using "vie".
Polish.
Polish uses as formal forms the words "pan" (meaning "mister" or "gentleman") and "pani" ("lady"), and in the plural "panowie" ("gentlemen") and "panie" ("ladies") respectively, "państwo" being used for mixed groups (originally a neutral noun, meaning roughly "lordship", but also, and until today, "state"). "Państwo" is used with the plural, like "panowie" and "panie". Because of their character as nouns (and not pronouns) these words are used with the third person: For example, the familiar "Chcesz pić" ("You want to drink") becomes "Pan chce pić" (literally "The gentleman wants to drink").
Further, "pan" and "pani" can be combined with the first name, the last name and with titles like "President", "Professor", "Doctor", "Editor" and others ("Pan Prezydent", "pani profesor" etc.; using these titles is considered necessary); using both ("Pan Prezydent Kowalski", "pani profesor Nowak") is considered more polite or, in some context, even submissive. Addressing a present person with the last name is only usual in court or in other affairs, where government authority is involved, and generally considered impolite or condescending. When addressing someone, all these forms always require the vocative case, which is otherwise optional (for example "panie Kowalski" ("Mr Kowalski!"), "pani Joanno" ("Mrs Joanna!"), "panie profesorze" ("professor!")). For "pan", "pani" etc. alone, "proszę" + genitive is used instead of vocative: "proszę pana", "proszę pani", "proszę panów", "proszę pań" and "proszę państwa".
The V-forms are capitalized only in actual letters (or e-mails), where the T-forms "ty" and "wy" are also capitalized.
Plural "wy" is also used as V-form in dialects, for example "Matko, co wy jecie?" ("Mother, what are you eating?"). It is also associated with stereotypical communists and officials, especially of communist era in Poland.
Besides, other forms can be sometimes used like "pan" in third person when talking to older family members ("Niech mama powie", "Say, mother"), to clergy ("Tak, dobrze ksiądz trafił", "Yes, you, priest, are in right place") or to other people in less formal or semi-formal situations, e.g. polite quarell or dispute ("Zatem – proszę kolegi – niech kolega się trochę douczy, a potem poucza innych", "Also, dear friend, learn more and then instruct others").
Slovene.
In Slovenian, although informal address using the 2nd person singular "ti" form (known as "tikanje") is officially limited to friends and family, talk among children, and addressing animals, it is increasingly used instead of its polite or formal counterpart using the 2nd person plural "vi" form (known as "vikanje").
There is an additional nonstandard but widespread use of a singular participle combined with a plural auxiliary verb (known as "polvikanje") that also reveals the gender of the person and is used in somewhat less formal situations:
The use of the 3rd person plural "oni" form (known as "onikanje" in both direct address and indirect reference) as an ultra-polite form is now archaic or dialectal; it is associated with servant-master relationships in older literature, the child-parent relationship in certain conservative rural communities, and in general with relationships with people of highest respect (parents, clergy, royalty).
Czech.
In Czech, there are three levels of formality. The most formal is using the second person plural verb forms (V form) with the surname or title of the addressed person, usual between strangers or people in a professional relationship. The second common form is made by using the second person singular verb forms (T form) together with the given name of the other person, used between friends and in certain social groups (students etc.). The third form, which is rather less common, is using the V form in combination with the given name. It may be used by a teacher when addressing a student (especially at the secondary school level), by a boss addressing his secretary, or in other relationships where a certain degree of familiarity has developed, but has not superseded some level of mutually acknowledged respect or distance. This form of address is usually asymmetrical (the perceived social superior uses V form in combination with the first name, the perceived social inferior using V form and the surname or honorific), less often symmetrical. Using the singular verb forms together with the surname or title is considered very rude. Where a stranger introduces himself with title (like "inženýr Novák", "doktor Svoboda"), it is considered more polite to address him using the V form in combination with his title (always preceded by the honorific "paní"/"pane", i.e. Mr/Madam), rather than his surname. However, it is considered poor manners to address somebody with his title in combination with the T form.
Traditionally, use of the informal form was limited for relatives, very close friends, and for children. During the second half of the 20th century, use of the informal form grew significantly among coworkers, youth and members of organisations and groups. The formal form is always used in official documents and when dealing with a stranger (especially an older one) as a sign of respect. 2nd-person pronouns ("Ty, Tvůj, Vy, Váš") are often capitalized in letters, advertisement, etc. The capitalization is optional and is slowly becoming obsolete. A variant of the formal form modeled after German "Sie" ("Oni/oni", "Jejich/jejich", verb "onikat") was frequently used during the 19th century but has since disappeared. This form is also associated with Czech Jewish community before Second World War, and still appears very often in Jewish humour as sign of local colour. Sometimes it is used as irony.
In the Internet age, where people communicate under nicknames or pseudonymes and almost solely in informal way, capitalizing ("ty/Ty" mirroring English "you/You") is used to emphasise respect, or simply presence of respect. ("Ty" = friends, honored acquaintance, strangers "ty" = basic form, "vy/Vy" = most formal, used to create distance or express contempt, very rude if not sufficiently advocated, often used as insult itself). 
In grammar, plural forms are used in personal and possessive pronouns ("vy" – you, "váš" – your) and in verbs, but not in participles and adjectives, they are used in singular forms (when addressing a single person). This differs from some other Slavic languages (Slovak, Russian, etc.)
Greetings are also connected with T–V distinction. Formal "dobrý den" (good day) and "na shledanou" (good-bye) are used with formal "vy", while "ahoj, nazdar, čau" (meaning both "hello, hi", and "bye") are informal and used with "ty".
Lithuanian.
In Lithuanian, historically, aside from familiar "tu" and respectful "jūs" or "Jūs", also used to express plural, there was a special form "tamsta", mostly referred to in third person singular (although referring in second person singular is also not uncommon). This form was used to communicate with a stranger who has not earned particular respect (a beggar, for example). Modern Lithuanian Dictionary describes "tamsta" as a polite form of second singular person "tu", making its meaning somewhere in the middle between informal "tu" and formal "jūs". Through the Soviet occupation period, however, this form was mostly replaced by standard neutral form "drauge" (the vocative case for "draugas", "comrade", the latter being the standard formal form of addressing in all languages of the Soviet Union used in all situations, from "comrade Stalin" to "comrade student"), and by now "tamsta" is used sparsely. A common way of addressing people whom one doesn't know well is also "Ponas" (m) and "Ponia" (f), from Polish forms of address "pan" and "pani", respectively.
Indic.
Hindi and Urdu.
In the standard forms of both Hindi and Urdu there are three levels of honorifics:
Bengali.
Bengali has three levels of formality in its pronouns; the most neutral forms of address among closer members of a family are তুমি "tumi" and তোমরা "tomra" (plural). These two pronouns are also typically used when speaking to children, or to younger members of the extended family. তুমি "tumi" is also used when addressing God. When speaking with adults outside the family, or with senior members of the extended family, the pronouns আপনি "apni" and আপনারা "apnara" (plural) are used. This is also true in advertisements and public announcements. A third set of pronouns, তুই "tui" and তোরা "tora" (plural), is reserved for use between very close friends, and by extension, between relatives who share a bond not unlike a close friendship. It is also used when addressing people presumed to be of "inferior" social status; this latter use is occasionally used when speaking to housemaids, rickshaw-pullers, and other service workers, although this use is considered offensive.
The situations in which these different pronouns can be used vary considerably depending on many social factors. In some families, children may address their parents with আপনি "apni" and আপনারা "apnara", although this is becoming increasingly rare. Some adults alternate between all three pronoun levels when speaking to children, normally choosing তুমি "tumi" and তোমরা "tomra", but also often choosing তুই "tui" and তোরা "tora" to indicate closeness, or আপনি "apni" or আপনারা "apnara" in a joking manner. Additionally, Bengalis vary in which pronoun they use when addressing servants in the home; some may use আপনি "apni" and আপনারা "apnara" to indicate respect for an adult outside the family, while others may use তুমি "tumi" and তোমরা "tomra" to indicate either inclusion into the family or to indicate somewhat less honorable status. Others may even use তুই "tui" and তোরা "tora" to indicate inferior status.
Finno-Ugric.
Finnish.
In Finnish, today the use of the informal singular form of address ("sinä") is widespread in all social circles, even among strangers and in business situations. The use of formal addressing has not disappeared however, and is alive for example in situations involving customer service (especially if a customer is clearly older than a person serving him or her) and in general in addressing the elderly or in situations where strict adherence to form is expected, such as in the military. Also an increase in the use of formal addressing has been reported in recent years, whereby some people are choosing to use the formal form more often.. As the use of the form conveys formal recognition of the addressee's status and, more correctly, of polite social distance, the formal form might also occasionally be used jeeringly or to protest the addressee's snobbery. A native speaker may also switch to formal form when speaking in anger, as an attempt to remain civil. Advertisements, instructions and other formal messages are mostly in informal singular form ("sinä" and its conjugations), but the use of formal forms has increased in recent years. For example, as the tax authorities tend to become more informal, in contrast the social security system is reverting to using the formal form.
The same forms, such as the pronoun "te", are used for formal singular and for both formal and informal plural.
In Finnish the number is expressed in pronouns ("sinä" for second person singular, or "te" for second person plural), verb inflections, and possessive suffixes. Almost all of these elements follow the grammar of the second person plural also in the formal singular form. For example, polite "Voisitteko (te) siirtää autonne" vs. informal "Voisitko (sinä) siirtää autosi", "Could you move your car, (please)?". Each of the person markers are modified: "-t-" to "-tte-" (verb person), "sinä" to "te" (pronoun), "-si" to "-nne" (possessive suffix).
As a few examples of this could be mentioned the way imperatives are expressed: "Menkää!" "Go!" (plural), vs. "Mene!" "Go!" (singular), and the usage of the plural suffix "-nne" "your" instead of the singular "-si" "your".
There is number agreement in Finnish, thus you say "sinä olet" "you are" (singular), but "te olette" "you are" (plural). However, this does not extend to words describing the addressee, which are in the singular, e.g. "oletteko te lääkäri?" "are you doctor?" (plural,plural,singular)
A common error, nowadays often made even by native speakers unused to the formal forms, is to use the plural form of the main verb in the perfect and pluperfect constructions. The main verb should be in the singular when addressing one person in the formal plural: "Oletteko kuullut?" instead of "*Oletteko kuulleet?" "Have you heard?"
Sometimes the third person is used as a polite form of address, after the Swedish model: "Mitä rouvalle saisi olla?" "What would madam like to have?" This is far less common in the Eastern parts of Finland, influenced less by the Swedish language and all in all a declining habit. The passive voice may be used to circumvent the choice of the correct form of address. In another meaning, the passive voice is also the equivalent of the English patronizing "we" as in "Kuinkas tänään voidaan?" "How are we feeling today?"
Finnish language includes the verbs for calling one with informal singular or formal plural: "sinutella", "teititellä", respectively.
In the Bible and in the Kalevala, only the "informal" singular is used in all cases.
Estonian.
Estonian is a language with T–V distinction, second person plural ("teie") is used instead of second person singular ("sina") as a means of expressing politeness or formal speech. "Sina" is the familiar form of address used with family, friends, and minors. The distinction is still much more widely used and more rigid than in closely related Finnish language.
Similar to the French language "vouvoyer", the verb "teietama" is used, and "teie" is used when addressing a (new) customer or a patient, or when talking to a person in his/her function. In hierarchical organizations, like large businesses or armies, "sina" is used between members of a same rank/level while "teie" is used between members of different ranks. "Sina" (the verb "sinatama" is also used) is used with relatives, friends, when addressing children and with close colleagues. Borderline situations, such as distant relatives, young adults, customers in rental shops or new colleagues, sometimes still present difficulties.
Hungarian.
Hungarian provides numerous, often subtle means of T–V distinction:
The use of the second-person conjugation with the pronoun "te" (plural "ti") is the most informal mode. As in many other European languages, it is used within families, among children, lovers, close friends, (nowadays often) among coworkers, and in some communities, suggesting an idea of brotherhood. Adults unilaterally address children this way, and it is the form used in addressing God and other Christian figures (such as Jesus Christ or the Blessed Virgin), animals, and objects or ideas. Sociologically, the use of this form is widening. Whereas traditionally the switch to "te" is often a symbolic milestone between people, sometimes sealed by drinking a glass of wine together ("pertu"), today people under the age of about thirty will often mutually adopt "te" automatically in informal situations. A notable example is the Internet: strangers meeting online use the informal forms of address virtually exclusively, regardless of age or status differences. 
Nevertheless, formal forms of address are alive and well in Hungarian:
It is important to keep in mind that formal conjugation doesn't automatically imply politeness or vice versa; these factors are independent of each other. For example, "Mit parancsolsz?" "What would you like to have?" (literally, "What do you command?") is in the informal conjugation, while it can be extremely polite, making it possible to express one's honour towards people one has previously established a friendly relationship with. On the other hand, "Mit akar?" "What do you want?" is expressed with the formal conjugation, nevertheless it may sound rude and aggressive; the formal conjugation does not soften this tone in any way.
Turkic.
Turkish.
In contemporary Turkish, the T–V distinction is strong. Family members and friends speak to one another using the second-person singular "sen", and adults use "sen" to address minors. In formal situations (business, customer-clerk, and colleague relationships, or meeting people for the first time) the plural second-person "siz" is used almost exclusively. In very formal situations, the double plural second-person "sizler" may be used to refer to a much-respected person. Rarely, the third-person plural form of the verb (but not the pronoun) may be used to emphasize utmost respect. In the imperative, there are three forms: second person singular for informal, second person plural for formal, and second person double plural for very formal situations: "gel" (second person singular, informal), "gelin" (second person plural, formal), and "geliniz" (double second person plural, very formal). The very formal forms are not frequently used in spoken Turkish, but is pretty common in written directives, such as manuals and warning signs.
Uyghur.
Uyghur is notable for using four different forms, to distinguish both singular and plural in both formal and informal registers. The informal plural "silär" originated as a contraction of "sizlär", which uses a regular plural ending. In Old Turkic, as still in modern Turkish, "siz" was the original second-person plural. However, in modern Uyghur "siz" has become restricted to the formal singular, requiring the plural suffix -"lär" for the plurals.
"Siz" as the formal singular pronoun is characteristic of the Ürümchi dialect, which is the Uyghur literary standard. In Turfan they say "sili" and in Kashgar dialect, "özlär". "Sili" is also used in other areas sometimes, while in literary Uyghur "özlär" as a singular pronoun is considered a "hyperdeferential" level of respect; the deferential plural form is "härqaysiliri".
Northwest Caucasian.
Ubykh.
In the extinct Ubykh language, the T–V distinction was most notable between a man and his mother-in-law, where the plural form "sʸæghʷa" supplanted the singular "wæghʷa" very frequently, possibly under the influence of Turkish. The distinction was upheld less frequently in other relationships, but did still occur.
Semitic.
Arabic.
Modern Standard Arabic uses the majestic plural form of the second person (أنتم "antum") to respectfully refer to the addressee. It is restricted to highly formal contexts, generally relating to politics and government. However, several varieties of Arabic have a clearer T–V distinction. The most developed is in Egyptian Arabic, which uses حضرتك "ḥaḍritak" (literally, "Your Grace"), سعادتك "sa`adtak" and سيادتك "siyadtak" (literally, "Your Lordship") as the "V" terms, depending on context, while أنت "inta" is the "T" term. "Ḥaḍritak" is the most usual "V" term, with "sa`adtak" and "siyadtak" being reserved for situations where the addressee is of very high social standing (e.g. a high-ranking government official or a powerful businessman). Finally, the "V" term is used only with social superiors (including elders); unfamiliar people perceived to be of similar or lower social standing to the speaker are addressed with the "T" term "inta".
Hebrew.
In modern Hebrew, there is a T–V distinction used in a set of very formal occasions, for example, a lawyer addressing a judge, or when speaking to rabbis. The second person singular "אתה" ("ata", masculine) or "את" ("at", feminine) are the usual form of address in all other situations, i.e. when addressing ministers or members of the Knesset.
The formal form of address when speaking to a person of higher authority is the third person singular using the person's title without the use of the pronoun. Thus, a rabbi could be asked: ("kevod ha-rav yirtze le-ekhol", "would the honorable rabbi like to eat?") or a judge told: "כבודו דן בבקשתי" ("kevodo dan be-bakashati", "his honour is considering my request").
Other persons of authority are normally addressed by their title only, rather than by name, using the second person singular. For example, officers and commanders in the army are addressed as "המפקד" ("hamfaked", "the commander") by troops.
In non-Hebrew-speaking Jewish culture, the second-person form of address is similarly avoided in cases of higher authority (e.g., a student in a yeshiva would be far more likely to say in a classroom discussion "yesterday the rabbi told us..." than "yesterday you told us..."). However, this usage is limited to more conservative (i.e. Orthodox) circles.
Dravidian.
Tamil.
In Tamil, the second-person singular pronoun நீ and its derived forms are used to address children, (younger or very close) members of the family and to people who are younger than the speaker. The second person plural pronoun நீங்கள் is used to address elders (also within the extended family), teachers, people who are older than the speaker and anyone whom the speaker does not personally know, especially in formal situations.
Sino-Tibetan.
Chinese.
Chinese culture has taken naming and forms of address very seriously, strictly regulating which people were permitted to use which terms in conversation or in writing. The extreme example is the 1777 execution of Wang Xihou and his entire family and the confiscation of their entire estate for his penalty of writing the Qianlong Emperor's personal name as part of a criticism of the Kangxi Dictionary. Many honorifics and niceties of address fell by the wayside during the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s amid Mao Zedong's campaign against the "Four Olds". This included an attempt to eradicate expressions of deference to teachers and to others seen as preserving "counter-revolutionary" modes of thought. The defeat of the Maoist Gang of Four in the late 1970s and continuing reforms since the 1980s has, however, permitted a return of such traditional and regional expressions.
Historically, the T–V distinction was observed among the Chinese by avoiding "any" use of common pronouns in reference to a respected audience. Instead, third-person honorifics and respectful titles were employed. One aspect of such respectful address was avoiding the use of the "first"-person pronoun as well, instead choosing a (typically humble) epithet in its place. The extreme of this practice occurred when Shi Huangdi abrogated the then-current first-person pronoun ("zhèn"); the present first-person pronoun ("wǒ") subsequently developed out of the habit of referring to "this body", the character's original meaning. An important difference between the T–V distinction in Chinese compared with modern European languages is that Chinese culture considers the relative age of the speakers an important aspect of their social distance. This is especially strong within families: while the speakers of European languages may generally prefer forms of address such as "father" or "grandpa", Chinese speakers consider using the personal names of elders such a taboo that they may not even "know" the given names of grandparents who live in the same apartment. While strictures against writing the personal name of any ancestor of the last seven generations are no longer observed, it remains very uncommon to name children for any living relative: younger people using the name freely would disrespect the original bearer.
In the present day, the informal second-person pronoun is (Mandarin: "nǐ"; Minnan: "lí") and the honorific pronoun is (Mandarin: "nín"; Minnan: "lín"). Much like European languages, the honorific form developed out of an earlier second-person plural: during the Jin and Yuan dynasties, the Mandarin dialects mutated ("nǐměi") into ("nǐmen") and then into . (A similar form , "tān" developed for the third-person singular but is now generally unused.) It is worth noting that the T–V distinction in Mandarin does "not" connote a distance or lack of intimacy between the speakers (as implied, e.g., in the French "vous"). On the contrary, it is often noted that the respectful form contains the radical for "heart" (, "xīn"); although this is actually for phonetic reasons, the implication is that the addressee is loved and cherished by the speaker.
Most southern dialects, however, do not make this distinction in speech at all. Cantonese and Shanghainese speakers learn to "write" both forms in school but pronounce them identically: the Cantonese as "nei"5 and the Shanghainese as "nóng". Formality is still respected, but their languages like Japanese and Vietnamese retain the earlier Chinese tradition of employing epithets or honorifics instead of using any pronouns at all when showing formal respect.
Japonic.
Japanese.
Under heavy Chinese influence, traditional Japanese culture eschewed the use of common pronouns in formal speech; similarly, the Chinese first-person singular (, "chin") was arrogated to the personal use of the emperor. The formality of Japanese culture was such that its original pronouns have largely ceased to be used at all. Some linguists therefore argue that Japanese lacks "any" pronouns whatsoever, but although it is a larger and more complex group of words than most languages employ Japanese pronouns do exist, having developed out of the most common epithets used to express different relationships and relative degrees of social status. As in Korean, polite language encompasses not only these specific pronouns but also suffixes and vocabulary as well.
Most commonly, (, "kimi", orig. "prince", "lord") is used informally as the second-person singular and (, "anata", lit. "dear one") is the most common polite equivalent. The pronoun (, "kisama") is illustrative of the complexity that can be involved, though, in that its literal meaning is quite flattering lit. "dear and honorable sir" but its ironic use has made it a strong insult in modern Japanese. Similarly, (, "omae") lit. "(one who is) before (me)" was traditionally a respectful pronoun used toward aristocrats and religious figureheads, but today is considered very informal and impolite.
Austro-Asiatic.
Vietnamese.
Under heavy Chinese influence, Vietnamese culture has eschewed the use of common pronouns in formal speech; similarly, the Chinese first-person singular (Vietnamese: "trẫm") was arrogated to the personal use of the emperor.
In modern Vietnamese, only the first-person singular "tôi" is in common use as a respectful pronoun; any other pronoun should be replaced with the subject's name or with an appropriate epithet, title, or relationship in polite formal speech. Similar to modern Chinese (but to a much greater extent), modern Vietnamese also frequently replaces "informal" pronouns with kinship terms in many situations. The somewhat insulting second-person singular "mày" is also frequently used in informal situations among young Vietnamese.
Tai–Kadai languages.
Thai.
In Thai, first, second, and third person pronouns vary in formality according to the social standing of the speaker and the referent and the relationship between them. For a non-exhaustive list of Thai second person pronouns, see http://www.into-asia.com/thai_language/grammar/you.php.
Austronesian.
Indonesian.
In Indonesian, the T–V distinction is extremely important; addressing a stranger with the pronouns "kau" or "kamu" is considered rude and impolite (unless the stranger is, for example, a teenager). When addressing one's friends of parents or grandparents, typically "Bu" ('ma'am') or "Pak" ('sir') are used. If the situation is more formal, such as with meetings or news broadcasts, "Anda" is always used, even if those addressed would otherwise be addressed by "kau" or "kamu" in informal situations. A more informal pronoun, written "lu", "lo", or sometimes as "loe" is considered very impolite. This is normally used by teenagers (particularly in urban centers) to their peers. Adults almost never use this pronoun.
Similarly, "kalian" dan "Anda"/"Anda sekalian" are used.
Tagalog.
In Tagalog, the familiar second person is "ikáw/ka" (in the nominative case). This is replaced by "kayó" (which is actually the second person plural) when the situation calls for a more polite tone. The pronoun "kayó" is accompanied by the particle "pô". This form is generally used to show respect to close, older relatives. This is also the form expected when talking with friends of parents or grandparents.
However, when formality is required, the third person plural ("silá") is used instead. This form is used when talking with complete strangers or people with high ranks, such as government officials.
Younger generations who are basically ignorant of proper Tagalog grammar usually confuse these forms of address, thus may ask someone "Sino ka pô ba?" in an attempt to sound polite towards a total stranger. This and other ungrammatical variants are very widespread especially in Metro Manila and surrounding suburbs.
Other languages.
Korean.
The Korean language, like Japanese, employs distinct linguistic registers to express relative status and degrees of formality. Verbs can be exceptionally difficult, with conjugations including various honorific suffixes: "-p-" () or "-sup-" ( or ) is employed when expressing respect towards one's audience; when expressing respect towards the verb's grammatical subject, "-yo-" () is used concerning peers and subordinates and "-eusi-" () or "-si-" () towards social superiors. Some verbs have completely different honorific forms. Plain forms (, "yesanmal") are used when speaking to family and a still-plainer form (, "banmal", lit. "half speech") may be used among close friends or towards social inferiors. These simple forms, however, become a provocative insult when used towards those who have reason to expect respectful address. As a rule, Koreans are taught to use polite forms (, "jondaenmal") until it is determined who is socially inferior or to ask for permission to converse in basic forms (, "mareul nota", lit. "release language") in order to avoid offense.
The nouns also have a special register of honorific vocabulary. When such a word (e.g., the respectful "abeonim" () form of "father") is used as the subject of a sentence, it triggers the polite verb forms regardless of the speakers' relative status, an occasion known as "nopimmal" ().
Under heavy Chinese influence, Korean generally avoids using pronouns in respectful situations. Unlike Japanese and Vietnamese, Korean does possess a respectful form of the second person: "dangshin" (). Its use is strongly curtailed, though, and it is typically only used in conversations between romantically-committed partners or when praying to God. The "regular" second person pronoun "neo" () is likewise quite limited in its application, being appropriate only between close friends born during the same year or from an older speaker towards a younger close friend. In other situations, like the other East Asian languages, Koreans employ third-person nouns: common epithets include job titles among coworkers; "student" (, "haksaeng") for teens; "uncle" (, "ajeosshi") and "aunt" (, "ajumma") for older individuals, typically service workers; and "guest" (, "sonnim") for customers.
Basque.
Basque has two levels of formality in every dialect, which are hi and zu; Nevertheless, in some areas of Gipuzkoa and Biscay, the respectful form berori is still used by some speakers, just as the familiar xu in some areas of the Eastern Low Navarrese dialect, when addressing children and close friends. Most speakers only use the "zu" form ("zuka" level) and that is the usual one used in methods, slogans... although the "hi" form ("hika") is very common in villages.
The neutral or formal one is "zu", which originally used to be the plural form of the second person. The informal one is "hi", whose use is limited to some specific situations: among close friends, to children (children never use it when addressing their parents, neither the spouses among them), when talking to a younger person, to animals (cattle, pets...), in monologues, and when speaking angrily to somebody. Their common plural form is "zuek", whenever the speaker is talking to a group of listeners who would all be individually addressed with the form "zu", or the form "hi", or both (a conversation where some listeners are addressed as "zu" —i.e., somebody's parents, for instance— and others as "hi" —the speaker's siblings—).
Unlike "zu", "hi" often makes a distinction whether the addressed one is a male or a female. For example: "duk" (thou, male, hast) and "dun" (thou, female, hast). The use of the hika level requires the allocutive agreement ("hitano" or "zeharkako hika", i.e., indirect "hika") in non-subordinate sentences to mark this distinction for the first and third person verbs. Those allocutive forms are found in the Indicative and Conditional moods, but never in the Subjunctive and Imperative moods, with the one exception of "goazemak" (let's go, said to a male) and "goazeman" (said to a female) in Western dialects, opposed to "goazen", the neutral form. For example:
Nevertheless, if any of the allocutive sentences becomes subordinate, the formal one is used: "aitak ikasi duelako" (because Dad has learned it), "aitak erosi diolako" (because Dad bought it for him / her), and "hona etorri nintzenean" (when I came here).
On the other hand, in past tense verbal forms, no distinction is made when is the addressee is the subject or the direct object in the sentence. For example:
But if the familiar second-person appears in the verb, or if the verb is an allocutive form in a non-dependent clause, the masculine and feminine forms differ. For example:
The friendly "xu" form or xuketa resembles the "zuka" forms of the verbs, and includes another kind of allocutive, as "hika": cf. "egia erran dut" (formal: I told the truth), "egia erran diat" (informal, said to a male), "egia erran dinat" (informal, said to a female), "egia erran dautzut" (in formal Eastern Low Navarrese, I told "you" the truth) and "egia erran dixut" ("xuketa"). It is mainly used among relatives and close friends.
The "berori" form or berorika is very formal, and hardly used nowadays, mainly in some areas of Biscay and Gipuzkoa, to address priests, the elderly, judges and the nobility. Verbs are inflected in their singular third form, like in Italian ("(Lei) è molto gentile", opposed to "(tu) sei molto gentile", you are very nice / thou art very nice) or the Spanish "(usted) es muy amable", opposed to "(tú) eres muy amable"):
Unlike the "hika" level, "berorika" has no allocutive forms.
The extinct dialect of Erronkari or Roncal, spoken in the easternmost area of Navarre, presented a four-levelled system:
Constructed languages.
Esperanto.
Esperanto is not a T–V-distinguishing language. "Vi" is the generic second person for both singular and plural, just like "you" in modern English. An informal second person singular pronoun, "ci", does exist, but it is almost never used in practice. It is mainly intended to make the familiar/respectful distinction when translating (literature for example) from languages that do have the T–V-distinction.
Some have imagined "ci" as an archaic term that was used before and then fell out of common usage; however, this is not true. It has appeared only sometimes in experimental language. In standard Esperanto, "vi" has always been used since the beginning. For example, "ci" appears in neither the "Fundamenta Gramatiko" nor the "Unua Libro".
Ido.
In Ido, in theory "tu" is limited to friends and family, whereas "vu" is used anywhere else. However, many users actually adapt the practice in their own mother tongue and use "tu" and "vu" accordingly. In the plural, though, the only form in use is "vi", which does not distinguish between formal and informal address.
In all cases, an -n is added to the original pronoun to indicate a direct object that precedes its own verb: "Me amoras tu" (I love you) becomes "Tun me amoras" if the direct object takes the first place, for example for emphatic purposes.
Tolkien's High Elvish.
In High Elvish, self-named Quenya, the T–V distinction is present and very usual. Most commonly, in second-person, "te" (or verbal desinences "-t" and "-tye-") is used to singular and "le" (or desinences "-l" and "-lye-" is used to plural).
However, there are three variations of use: the common, that we described above; the familiar; and the formal.
Related verbs, nouns and pronouns.
Some languages have a verb to describe the fact of using either a "T" or a "V" form. Some also have a related noun or pronoun.The English words are used to refer only to English usage in the past, not to usage in other languages. The analogous distinction may be expressed as "to use first names" or "to be on familiar terms (with someone)".

</doc>
<doc id="73512" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73512" title="Baedeker">
Baedeker

Verlag Karl Baedeker, founded by Karl Baedeker on July 1, 1827, is a German publisher and pioneer in the business of worldwide travel guides. The guides, often referred to simply as "Baedekers" (a term sometimes used to refer to similar works from other publishers, or travel guides in general), contain, among other things, maps and introductions; information about routes and travel facilities; and descriptions of noteworthy buildings, sights, attractions and museums, written by specialists.
History (1827−1948).
Karl Baedeker.
1827−1859: Karl Baedeker (see article) had three
sons, Ernst, Karl and Fritz and after his death each, in turn, dictated by events, took over the running of the firm.
Ernst Baedeker.
1859−1861: Following the death of Karl Baedeker, his eldest son Ernst Baedeker (1833−1861) became the head of the firm. After his training as a bookseller in Braunschweig, Leipzig and Stuttgart, he had spent some time at the English publishing house "Williams & Norgate" in London. On New Year's Day, 1859, he had joined his father's publishing firm as a partner and just ten months later he was running it on his own.
His tenure at the helm of the firm saw the publication of three new travel guides in 1861 viz the first Baedeker travel guide in English, the handbook on "The Rhine" (from Switzerland to Holland), a guide in German on Italy ("Ober-Italien"), the first of a series on Italy, which his father had planned and one in French, also on Italy ("Italie septentrionale").
Ernst Baedeker died unexpectedly on 23 July 1861 of sunstroke in Egypt and his younger brother, Karl, assumed charge of the publishing house.
Karl Baedeker II.
1861−1877: Karl Baedeker II (1837−1911) continued the work started by his brother Ernst. In addition to the ongoing revision of existing guides, he published 14 new guides: four in German, seven in English and three in French. viz.
Karl Baedeker II worked with his younger brother Fritz, who joined the firm in 1869 as a partner and became the general manager. In 1877 (according to the source cited here) Karl, afflicted with an incurable mental condition, moved to a sanatorium near Esslingen am Neckar where he remained for the rest of his life.
Fritz Baedeker.
1869−1925: Under Fritz Baedeker (1844−1925) the company grew rapidly. In 1870, the Baedeker bookselling business was sold. In 1872, he moved the company's headquarters from Koblenz to Leipzig, a major move forward, as most of the reputable major German publishing houses were located there.
He also persuaded Eduard Wagner, the Baedeker cartographer in Darmstadt, to move to Leipzig and establish a new company with Ernst Debes, a talented cartographer from "Justus Perthes" a leading cartography firm in Gotha. The new company was named "Wagner and Debes" with offices adjacent to the new Baedeker address. Herbert Warren Wind, the author of "The House of Baedeker"
wrote:
He added:
Michael Wild, the Baedeker chronicler, refers to the
Baedeker maps as "a feast for the eye."
The expansion was fast and furious. New editions were now printed by several Leipzig printers, but the bulk of the revised editions of pre-1872 guides continued to be printed where all Baedeker guides had been produced before—the G.D. Baedeker printing works in Essen. Fritz ventured into territory none of his predecessors had covered before, inside and outside Europe e.g. Russia, Sweden, Norway, Palestine, Syria, Egypt, Greece, the Mediterranean, USA, Canada, India and South East Asia. Plans to publish guides on China and Japan had to be abandoned when war broke out in 1914. At home, the list of guides on German regions and cities continued to grow. His was the golden age of Baedeker travel guides.
Fritz also had the good fortune to have three of his four sons − Hans, Ernst and Dietrich − beside him in the firm, as editors and writers. Karl Baedeker III, the fourth son, entered academia and rose to become a professor of physics at the University of Jena, but he was killed in action at the Battle of Liège in August 1914. It was his son Karl Friedrich who revived Verlag Karl Baedeker after the Second World War.
During his reign, which lasted over 50 years, Fritz produced 73 new "Baedekers", as they came to be known universally. The Baedeker travel guides became so popular that "baedekering" became an English-language term for the purpose of traveling in a country to write a travel guide or travelogue about it.
Fritz Baedeker became the most successful travel guide publisher of all time and turned the publishing house into the most famous and reputable publisher of travel guides in the world. In 1909, Leipzig University conferred an honorary Ph.D. (a rare honour at the time) on him at its 500th anniversary convocation. This era in its history was brought to an end by the outbreak of World War I, after which the house of Baedeker went into decline, the victim of the post-war international geopolitical and economic conditions. Consequently, in 1920, Fritz broke with tradition and for some time thereafter, Baedeker guides to German cities and regions carried a limited amount of advertising.
Fritz Baedeker's released 39 guidebooks in German from 1872 to 1925, and 21 in English from 1872 to 1914. Twelve French titles were published between 1882 and 1910.
Hans Baedeker.
1925−1943: Hans Baedeker (1874−1959), the eldest son of Fritz Baedeker, took charge of the company in difficult times. His two brothers, Ernst and Dietrich, were with him, running the company. The firm had lost heavily by investing in government bonds during the First World War. The war had not only wreaked havoc on tourism, it had also resulted in anti-German sentiments around the world, particularly in America and France, where the guidebooks had been very popular and from where tourists had come in droves. Rising inflation, too, played its part in affecting tourism and the balance sheet of the publishing house.
The Great Depression put paid to any hopes of an early recovery in its fortunes. The arrival of Nazism made things even worse for anything connected with tourism. For the Baedeker publishing house it culminated in the destruction of their headquarters in Leipzig, with total loss of the firm's archives, in the early hours of December 4, 1943 when Britain's Royal Air Force bombarded the city. See also Baedeker Blitz for Baedeker Raids.
Hans was extremely proud of what the Baedeker clan had achieved and not one to give up trying to revive the firm.
He received a loan from Allen & Unwin, the London publishing house, which represented Baedeker in Britain, and continued to do whatever he could to rejuvenate the firm at home. On July 1, 1927, Hans celebrated the centenary of its foundation by holding a reception at the Leipzig "Harmonie", a popular venue for such events. The firm did make some progress and he managed to produce twelve new titles in German and five in English, though these included those commissioned by the Nazi regime. He also published the 1928 one-volume eighth and revised German edition of "Egypt" and in 1929 its eighth English edition, which many travel guidebooks connoisseurs and collectors consider to be two finest Baedeker travel guides ever published.
Hans Baedeker's released 10 guidebooks in German between 1928 and 1942. Several were commissioned by the Nazis, who had been vetting Baedeker guides, proposing and effecting changes in the text, as they saw fit, and laying down to whom certain guides could be sold. Baedecker was asked to publish a guidebook for the German Army of Occupation in Poland, with history written as the Nazis wished it to be written, as the introduction to the 1943 book "Das Generalgouvernement" reveals.
1948's "Leipzig" was the first post-World War II Baedeker and the last one to be published in Leipzig, which was now in the Russian zone. The Russians had not granted Baedeker a publishing licence. Hans got round this by having 10,000 copies printed by the "Bibliographisches Institut." However, after some 1000 copies had been sold, the Russians said the guidebook contained military secrets in the form of a map showing the site of their "Kommandantura", and confiscated the remaining copies.
New English titles during this time were 1927's "Tyrol and the Dolomites", 1931's "The Riviera" (including South Eastern France and Corsica), an edition of "Germany" for the 1936 Olympic Games, and 1939's "Madeira, Canary Islands, Azores, Western Morocco".
History (since 1948).
Karl Friedrich Baedeker.
1948−1979: Karl Friedrich Baedeker (1910−1979) was the son of Karl Baedeker III, who was killed in action at the Battle of Liège in 1914. He had worked as an editor at the firm before the outbreak of the Second World War. During the war, he saw active service and rose to the rank of Captain. Towards the closing stages of the war, he was taken prisoner in Austria by the Americans. After the war, he moved to Malente-Gremsmühlen in Schleswig-Holstein, where his wife and sister were living and which was in the British zone. Here, he worked in local government until 1948, latterly sorting out the Schleswig-Holstein archives when he decided to revive the family publishing business under the name of "Karl Baedeker ". His uncle Hans, had decided to stay on in Leipzig, which was now under the jurisdiction of the Russians who had not granted him a publishing licence. However, they were very close and Karl could draw on his uncle's experience to get things going. Even before the outbreak of war, Hans used to tell him:
Some American, British and German publishers had tried hard to buy the 'Baedeker' name, which was still a world brand, thinking that Karl Friedrich would be only too pleased to sell. However, as he said to Herbert Warren Wind:
In December 1949, he published his first offering—10,000 copies of "Schleswig-Holstein". This was printed in Glückstadt near Hamburg and contained some advertising to balance the books, as did some of his other contemperaneous titles. Allen & Unwin, the London publisher, once again helped the Baedeker firm with another loan and he published more city and regional guides in the years that followed.
In 1951, Karl Friedrich and Oskar Steinheil, a pre-war Baedeker editor, signed an agreement with Shell AG, the subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell, and Kurt Mair (1902–1957), the German printer and publisher based in Stuttgart, to produce a series of motoring guides. Baedeker would provide the text and Mair the finished product. The Baedeker Autoführer Verlag, Stuttgart was born. The slim guides called "Baedeker-Shell" guides were designed to fit into a man's jacket pocket or in the glove compartment of a car. The first ones covered Germany and were a huge success. Guides on other European countries followed in both German and English.
Karl Friedrich was now operating on two fronts. He continued to produce city and regional guides from Malente and with the publication of his 1954 "Berlin" guide in German, English and French, the Baedeker brand had been well and truly re-established. Florian, his only son, was by his side and his cousin Hans, the son of his uncle Dietrich, was engaged in producing the motoring guides from Stuttgart. Dietrich's other son Otto also helped run the firm until 1971 when he left to join another publishing house.
In 1956, Karl Friedrich moved his field of operations from Malente to Freiburg im Breisgau. In 1972, the Stuttgart operation moved to Ostfildern/Kemnat in the district of Esslingen where Volkmar Mair, the son of Kurt Mair, was now in charge.
With the rise of air travel in the 1960s and 1970s, Baedeker entered a new era. In 1974, the first post-war international guidebook appeared, financed largely by the German airline "Lufthansa"—the voluminous 872-page "Baedekers USA" in German, which had the look of traditional pre-war Baedekers.
Florian Baedeker.
Florian Baedeker (1943−1980), the only son of Karl Friedrich Baedeker, succeeded him when he died in 1979. After completing his studies in Munich in 1971, he had devoted himself to matters relating to book publishing under the guidance of his father, and had helped him with the preparation of the "Munich" guide, released for the 1972 Munich Olympic Games. Florian also carried out most of the work involved in preparing the city guides titled Baden-Baden, Constance, Strasbourg and Wiesbaden, published in the mid-1970s.
He also produced several short city guides.
Basel, the Swiss city which was first covered in a Baedeker guidebook by Karl Baedeker himself in his most celebrated guidebook "Schweiz", first published in 1844, was the title of Florian's own guide, published in 1978. It is considered by many to be one of his best city guides.
Florian Baedeker. a keen parachute jumper, was killed in a parachuting accident on October 26, 1980. He was 36.
Eva Baedeker.
Following the death of Florian, his mother, Karl Friedrich's widow Eva Baedeker, née Konitz (1913−1984), piloted the firm until she died in 1984. She was the last Baedeker to play an active role in running the Baedeker publishing house founded in 1827, and negotiated the sale of the Freiburg branch to Langenscheidt before she died. However, the "Karl Baedeker" brand name has been retained by all subsequent owners of the company, in one form or another.
Allianz.
Since 1979 Baedeker travel guides have appeared as "Baedeker Allianz Reiseführer" (travel guides), published in collaboration with the German insurance group Allianz. Multi-coloured with copious illustrations and in many languages, they now cover most of the popular tourist destinations in the world. Over 150 guides have been published already and the list keeps growing, as well as the number of languages in which they are published.
In Britain, the guides have been published in collaboration with the British Automobile Association (The AA) and in the USA by Macmillan Travel, a Simon & Schuster Macmillan company.
Langenscheidt.
The Freiburg Baedeker branch was acquired by the German publisher Langenscheidt following the death of Eva Baedeker. In 1987, both Baedeker branches, the Langenscheidt operation in Freiburg and the Baedeker Autoführer Verlag in Stuttgart operated by the Mairs publishing group, were merged and housed together in Ostfildern/Kemnat as "Karl Baedeker GmbH" with a branch in Munich. The ownership of the new venture was split down the middle between Langenscheidt and Mairs.
MairDumont.
In 1997, Mairs Geographischer Verlag, now known as , became the 100% owner of Verlag Karl Baedeker, along with all rights attached to Karl Baedeker's name and firm. The new English Baedekers produced by MairDumont dispensed with the "Allianz" logo in the title, with the German editions doing the same in 2013. This marked the beginning of a new era in the appearance and content of modern Baedekers under the catchphrase ""Wissen öffnet Welten"" ("Knowledge opens worlds").
The previous German editions had four main sections: "Background", "Tours", "Destinations from A to Z" and "Practical Information from A to Z". MairDumont added a fifth section in each guidebook entitled ""Erleben und Geniessen"" ("Experience and Enjoy"). These new Baedeker guides were the first such guidebooks to incorporate infographics.
Baedeker English editions.
From the outset, Karl Baedeker recognised the importance of publishing his guides in English as well. His son Ernst had worked in London before joining Verlag Baedeker in 1859, and was entrusted with the task of preparing the first Baedeker in English. "The Rhine" appeared in 1861 and was a tremendous success.
English editions, it was felt, would give the firm the international recognition it required to enhance its image and standing in the travel guide publishing world. This was achieved by recruiting the most competent bilingual editors in the field and the publishing house was fortunate to retain their services for decades without a break.
James and Findlay Muirhead.
The Scottish brothers James Francis Muirhead (1853−1934) and Findlay Muirhead (1860−1935) played a significant role in popularising the English guidebooks worldwide. James, the elder brother, had been taken on as editor of the English editions by Fritz Baedeker in 1879, at age 25; Findlay joined him later as joint editor. They were responsible for all the Baedeker editions in English for almost forty years.
The Muirhead brothers were as enthusiastic about the guides as the Baedeker family and worked to produce quality handbooks. The Great Britain, London and Canada editions, in particular, won widespread acclaim. James Findlay is given the credit for two-thirds of the content in the "Canada" guidebook, first published in 1894. The "Canada" guide is the sole classic Baedeker to have been published only in English.
James Muirhead's worked on the 1893 edition of "The United States", which ran to four editions while he was with the firm. Herbert Warren Wind wrote:
It had taken James Muirhead two and a half years to research and write "The United States". In the preface to "The United States", the publishers acknowledged Muirhead's work in producing the travel guide. The 724-page fourth edition, published in 1909, included excursions to Cuba, Puerto Rico and Alaska in addition to Mexico.
After the First World War, Findlay launched his own series of the famous Blue Guides, published in London by Ernest Benn. His brother joined him in the venture shortly afterwards.
Hermann Augustine Piehler.
Hermann Augustine Piehler (1888−1987)—better known as H.A. Piehler in the publishing world—was an Englishman of German descent who became the chief editor of the English editions after the Muirheads left. During his student days, Karl Friedrich Baedeker had spent a year in England and had lived with Piehler at his London residence. In 1948, when Karl Friedrich decided to re-establish the Baedeker firm in Malente (British zone, in Germany), he had the good fortune to have his publishing licence endorsed by Piehler, who was then a colonel in British Intelligence and the head of the 'books and publications' division in the district. Upon his return to England, Piehler continued editing the English guides well into his eighties. In the meantime, his brother had been editing the new Baedeker "London" guide.
The Baedekers, for their part, were always generous in acknowledging the commitment of the Muirheads and Piehler to their firm, and the contribution they had made to the success of Verlag Karl Baedeker.

</doc>
