<doc id="54552" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54552" title="Syldavia">
Syldavia

Syldavia is a fictional country in "The Adventures of Tintin", the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé. It is located in the Balkans and has a rivalry with the fictional neighbouring country of Borduria. Syldavia is depicted in "King Ottokar's Sceptre", "Destination Moon", "Tintin and the Lake of Sharks", and "The Calculus Affair", and is referred to in "Tintin and the Picaros".
Overview.
Syldavia is a monarchy, ruled at the time of "King Ottokar's Sceptre" by King Muskar XII. The capital is Klow, formerly Zileheroum, located at the confluence of the fictional Moltus and Wladir Rivers (after Prague, which is on the Moldau/Vltava River). Other cities named in the books are Niedzdrow, Istow, Dbrnouk, Douma and Zlip. The population of Syldavia is 642,000 with 122,000 living in Klow, suggesting the country is similar in size to Montenegro. The national airline is Syldair and the official currency is the khôr (Зилдaв хор).
Syldavia is also called "The Kingdom of the Black Pelican" and its flag is yellow with a black pelican in the center. It somewhat resembles the flag of the Holy Roman Empire, the Basque Arrano beltza, as well as the flag of Albania. However, the royal seal on the wall in "King Ottokar's Sceptre" bears a striking resemblance with the Coat of arms of Montenegro. In line with that, in Montenegro is located the largest resort of pelicans in Europe.
The people speak Syldavian, a language that looks and sounds Slavic but is mostly based on the West Germanic Marols dialect from Brussels. It is written in Cyrillic, but curiously, the Latin alphabet is used in medieval documents, and some of the Cyrillic letters used are a straight transcription from the Latin letters (e.g., "sh" is written "сз" -compare to Polish "sz"- rather than "ш").
The kingdom's motto is "Eih bennek, eih blavek!" which Hergé translates as ""Qui s'y frotte s'y pique"" "Who rubs himself there gets stung" (in fact, the motto of Nancy, from the Latin "non inultus premor", referring to its emblem, the thistle; in the British edition, the translators rendered the motto "If you gather Thistles, expect Prickles"). The motto can also be interpreted as a Brussels dialect rendering of the Dutch phrase ""Hier ben ik, hier blijf ik"" ("Here I am, here I stay").
Syldavians seem to be fond of mineral water, which does not go down well with the whisky-drinking Captain Haddock, one of Tintin's travelling companions.
The exact location of Syldavia is not given in the comics, and nothing more is known than that it is located on the Balkan peninsula, bordering another fictional country Borduria, and that it has an access to the sea. It is also mistaken for Greece in one instance, but explained as having very different local clothing. In "Destination Moon", the trail of the Syldavian-launched rocket points to a location north of the Danube. There are various inspirations for Syldavia. As Hergé noted himself the primary inspiration was Royal Montenegro, but the country's history is modeled after many Balkan countries. Hergé's assistant Har Brok writes that Syldavia "may have been modelled after a country like Romania or Yugoslavia".
History.
The region of Syldavia was inhabited by nomadic tribes of unknown origin until the 6th century, when it was overrun by Slavs. It was conquered in the 10th century by the Turks, who occupied the plains forcing the Slavs into the mountains (a historical inaccuracy, since the Balkans were conquered in the 14th century). The modern Syldavia was formed in 1127 when a tribal chief called Hveghi drove away Turkish conquerors defeated at the battle of Zileheroum and took the name Muskar ruling until 1168. Although he was a successful ruler, his son Muskar II was an inferior king as ruler. Borduria conquered the country during the reign of Muskar II in 1195 until Ottokar I (his real name and title being Baron Almaszout) drove them away in 1275.
King Ottokar IV became King in 1360. He took away the power of many upstart nobles. When an enemy, Baron Staszrvitch, claimed the Throne and attacked him with his sword, Ottokar struck him to the ground with his sceptre. The King then said the motto and decreed that the ruler of Syldavia must have hold on the sceptre, otherwise he would lose his authority, as it had saved his life. This custom had the power of law as late as 1939.
In 1939 Syldavia was nearly invaded by its neighbor Borduria, part of it was a plot to oust King Muskar XII. The sceptre was stolen, in the hope that the king would abdicate. Tintin had a hand in defusing the situation by returning the sceptre just before St Vladmir's day. The Bordurians then announced they were withdrawing troops 15 miles from the borders. (The situation was very similar to that of Anschluss in Austria in 1938 though the conclusion was not the same).
King Muskar XII is a keen motorist who drives himself with only an aide for escort, and carries his own pistol for protection. He appears in elaborate hussar dress for court and public ceremonies and in a plainer uniform on other occasions. Muskar XII is an actual ruler rather than a constitutional monarch (see enlightened absolutism). He himself ordered his ministers and generals to make the moves necessary to prevent the coup and the invasion. King Muskar XII is married, but his queen's name is not known.
The king is noticeably absent from the other stories set in or involving Syldavia: The Calculus Affair and Explorers on the Moon. Both were set after World War II, at a time when the various Balkan monarchies providing models for the fictional Syldavia had been overthrown and their rulers exiled. It is not clear whether the post-war Syldavia is a communist state or a democratic republic.
Coat of arms.
The Syldavian achievement of arms is shown on the title page and page 62 of the "King Ottokar's Sceptre" album. It would be blazoned heraldically as follows:
"Quarterly, first and fourth Or a pelican displayed sable, second and third gules two increscents in fess argent; for a crest, on a barred helmet affronty or, mantled azure doubled Or, the Royal Crown of Syldavia proper; behind the shield the Royal Sceptre of Syldavia and a sceptre of justice in saltire; the motto "Eih bennek, eih blavek" on a scroll below the shield, pendent therefrom the badge of the Order of the Golden Pelican."
Language.
In their book "Tintin Ketje de Bruxelles" (Casterman, 2004 ISBN 2-203-01716-3), Daniel Justens and Alain Préaux have documented how the Syldavian language is based on "Marols" or "Marollien", the dialect of the Marollen, a formerly working-class (though now trendy) quarter of Brussels. Marols, which Hergé learnt from his grandmother, is a form of Dutch incorporating many words of French origin as well as a sprinkling of Spanish. Syldavian seems to incorporate features of various Central European languages onto the Marols foundation to suit Hergé's taste, such as German, Polish, Czech, and Hungarian. It is written both in Cyrillic and in Latin script, like Serbian.
Educated Syldavians are shown speaking Tintin's language (French in the original). There is a hint that German is the predominant second language among the less educated, as in one scene, when Haddock complains he is thirsty, a Syldavian soldier doesn't understand him until he yells "ich bin durstig". At that time, German was the dominant lingua franca in Central and Eastern Europe, and Syldavians would be expected to have a better command of German than most other Central or Eastern Europeans, as their language is related to German.
Cuisine.
Syldavian cuisine appears to be typical of Eastern Europe; blini, herbs, sausage and garnish are seen in the kitchen of a Syldavian restaurant in "King Ottokar's Sceptre". Mineral water is an important export, and alcohol is scarce, much to Captain Haddock's disgust. When Haddock tries to bring in alcohol with him when visiting Calculus at the research facility, he is hit with high alcohol duty.
It is mentioned that a prime dish in the country is szlaszeck, described by a waiter as the hind leg of a young dog in heavy Syldavian sauce. However, this may not be true as the waiter was deliberately attempting to disturb Tintin. Szlaszeck (apparently from Polish "szaszłyk", "shish kebab") is served to Tintin with mushrooms and a salad.
Atomic research.
In the 1950s Syldavia had a secret but successful space program in the area of Sbrodj (named Sprodj in the English edition).
The Sprodj Atomic Research Centre, seen in "Destination Moon" and "Explorers on the Moon" is located in Syldavia. The sprawling complex is located in the Zymylpathian Mountains of Syldavia (a play on the Carpathian Mountains), located close to rich deposits of uranium. The Centre is secretive and has very tightly-guarded security, including a large number of security checkpoints, helicopter surveillance, anti-aircraft artillery, and a squadron of fighter aircraft based at the facility. Work at the centre, carried out by a large team of international physicists recruited by the Syldavian government, involves research into protection from the effects of nuclear weapons, and is the base for the Syldavian space program. The facility, which seems to be entirely self-sufficient, is administered by the Director, Mr. Baxter. The Sprodj Centre has its own atomic pile for processing uranium into plutonium, and has vast facilities for the research and construction of the rocket-ship which carries Tintin and his colleagues to the moon. The gargantuan complex is last seen at the end of "Explorers on the Moon", and is never again seen in the Tintin series.
In "Destination Moon", the Sprodj Atomic Research Centre invites Professor Calculus to head its space division, and later Tintin and Captain Haddock to be part of the moon mission. In "The Calculus Affair", Syldavia's secret agents compete with archrival Bordurian agents to kidnap Professor Calculus and obtain the secrets to develop sound-based weapons.
National Dance.
The Blushtika, meaning "Goat Dance Twisting," as seen in "Tintin and the Lake of Sharks".
National Lake.
The national lake is "Pollishoff", meaning "Lake of Sharks". The inspiration for this lake seems to be various lakes in Macedonia, particularly the Ohrid lake.
National Defence and ceremonial military units.
By 1930s standards Syldavia has a modern military, equipped with anti-aircraft guns and radar stations. It appears to have well prepared defensive systems with checkpoints and bunkers.
The army has an Eastern European appearance, possibly modeled on that of Poland or Czechoslovakia. The armed police or gendarmerie are stationed in both rural and urban areas.
The Royal Guard wear hussar uniforms, a style which originated in Eastern Europe. The ceremonial guards at the Royal Treasure House, Klow have elaborate costumes of traditional Balkan design and are armed with halberds.
Capital.
The capital of Syldavia is Klow. The city was founded in the 10th century by the invading Turks, and was then named Zilehorum. The Magyar nomads that lived there were forced to live in Zmyhlpathernian mountains, while the Turks themselves settled in the newly founded city located in the lush hills. In the year 1127, the nomads, led by their chief Hveghi, defeated and drove away the Turkish conquerors. Hveghi took the name Muskar, meaning "the brave" and Zileheroum was renamed to Klow, meaning "freetown" from "kloho" ("freedom") and "ow" ("town"). In 1168, Muskar died, and was followed by his son Muskar II. Muskar II, however, was weak, and the neighboring Bordurians took over the country.
Klow has a wide variety of cultural styles. Mostly typical Yugoslavian, there are also many buildings of Austrian and Turkish descent, for example the old mosques. However, the Kropow castle's architecture and decoration is of Bohemian descent, but this could be because of the fame of Czech architecture.
As a large and relatively well-off capital city, Klow has a large museum of natural science with mounted dinosaur skeletons. Klow is said to be the Capital of Mineral Water, and they are famous for their Klowaswa (Cyrillic: Кловасва), their national mineral water, literally meaning "Klow Water" or "Water from Klow". In contrast to ordinary Syldavians, who use Cyrillic, the Royal Court in Klow uses the Latin alphabet.
In popular culture.
The song "Sildavia" from the Spanish group "La Unión" ("Mil Siluetas", 1984) mentions this country as a land of dreams. The Dutch group Flairck also has a song called "Syldavian walz", featured in his album "The Emigrant" ("Syldavishe walls", "De Emigrant", 1989).
Sources.
Tintin stories with Syldavia:

</doc>
<doc id="54553" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54553" title="Mnemosyne">
Mnemosyne

Mnemosyne ( or ; , ), source of the word "mnemonic", was the personification of memory in Greek mythology. A Titanide, or Titaness, she was the daughter of Uranus and Gaia, and the mother of the nine Muses by Zeus:
In Hesiod's "Theogony", kings and poets receive their powers of authoritative speech from their possession of Mnemosyne and their special relationship with the Muses.
Zeus and Mnemosyne slept together for nine consecutive nights, thus birthing the nine Muses. Mnemosyne also presided over a pool in Hades, counterpart to the river Lethe, according to a series of 4th century BC Greek funerary inscriptions in dactylic hexameter. Dead souls drank from Lethe so they would not remember their past lives when reincarnated. Initiates were encouraged to drink from the river Mnemosyne when they died, instead of Lethe. These inscriptions may have been connected with Orphic poetry (see Zuntz, 1971).
Similarly, those who wished to consult the oracle of Trophonius in Boeotia were made to drink alternately from two springs called "Lethe" and "Mnemosyne." An analogous setup is described in the Myth of Er at the end of Plato's "Republic."

</doc>
<doc id="54554" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54554" title="Bagdad">
Bagdad

Bagdad may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="54563" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54563" title="Jars of Clay">
Jars of Clay

Jars of Clay is a Christian rock band from Nashville, Tennessee. They met at Greenville College in Greenville, Illinois.
Jars of Clay consists of Dan Haseltine on vocals, Charlie Lowell on piano and keyboards, Stephen Mason on lead guitars and Matthew Odmark on rhythm guitars. Although the band has no permanent drummer or bassist, Jeremy Lutito and Gabe Ruschival of Disappointed By Candy fill these roles for live concerts. Past tour band members include Aaron Sands, Scott Savage, and Joe Porter. Jars of Clay's style is a blend of alternative rock, folk, acoustic, and R&B.
The band's name is derived from the New International Version's translation of 2 Corinthians 4:7:
This verse is paraphrased in their song "Four Seven", which appears as a hidden track on the CD release of their self-titled album.
Band history.
Formation and early success.
Dan Haseltine, Steve Mason, Charlie Lowell and Matt Bronleewe formed Jars of Clay at Greenville College, in Greenville, Illinois in the early 1990s. Charlie Lowell first met Dan Haseltine after noticing that he was wearing a Toad the Wet Sprocket shirt. Pursuing a career in music together was not necessarily their original goal; some of the first songs they wrote together were for music and recording classes they were taking at the time. Their second guitarist Matt Odmark joined some time later. While in college playing together at local coffee houses, Jars gained a reputation for their original arrangement of "Rudolph the Red Nosed Reindeer" which had been adapted to the tune of Nirvana's "Smells Like Teen Spirit".
In 1994, the band submitted a demo to a talent competition run by the Gospel Music Association and were selected as finalists. They traveled to Nashville to perform and won the contest. Back in Greenville, they self-released a limited-run of the same demo, which they named "Frail", after their song of the same name. The buzz from their performance in Nashville and the demo's popularity resulted in offers from record labels, so the band decided to drop school and move to Nashville. At this time, Bronleewe left the band to finish school and settle down with his fiancée. He was replaced with Matt Odmark, Lowell's childhood friend and fellow McQuaid Jesuit High School alum.
The band signed with Essential Records and started recording their first full-length studio album, "Jars of Clay". Adrian Belew, of progressive rock band King Crimson, heard the band and offered to produce, leading to him producing two songs - "Liquid" and "Flood". The band's self-titled debut released in 1995. When the single "Flood" began to climb the charts on mainstream radio stations, Silvertone Records (Essential's parent company) started to heavily promote the song, turning it into one of the biggest mainstream hits ever by a band on a Christian label. The album has since reached multi-platinum certification according to the RIAA. "Flood" peaked at No. 37 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and No. 12 on the "Billboard" Modern Rock chart, and was the band's only secular radio hit.
The band toured in support of other Christian acts, such as PFR, and aside mainstream acts like Matchbox Twenty, Duncan Sheik, and Sting. This resulted in a small backlash from some Christian groups.
The band released "Drummer Boy", a Christmas EP entitled, at the end of 1995. The EP was re-released, on Silvertone Records, in 1997 with a slightly different track listing on. The band's second album, "Much Afraid", produced by Stephen Lipson was also released in 1997. The album sold very well and went on to earn a Grammy award for "Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album". The album has since earned platinum certification by the RIAA. They released two music videos for this album for the songs "Crazy Times" and "Five Candles (You Were There)".
In 1999, Jars of Clay released their third album, "If I Left the Zoo", which was produced by Dennis Herring. The record earned the band their second Grammy award. It was during this time that touring drummer Scott Savage left the band's touring group to play for Jaci Velasquez and was replaced by Joe Porter. Lead radio single, "Unforgetful You", was also featured on the soundtrack to the motion picture "Drive Me Crazy". "Collide" was also featured on the motion picture "Hometown Legend". Upon the release of "If I Left the Zoo" they also released Front Yard Luge and after a year The White Elephant Sessions. "If I Left the Zoo" so far has the most singles released by Jars of Clay.
Early 2000s.
In 2001, the four members of the band received honorary degrees at Greenville College. Only three of them, Haseltine, Lowell, and Mason, had studied at the school before dropping out in 1994 to move to Nashville. Odmark still received an honorary degree, despite having attended the University of Rochester in upstate New York.
In 2002, the band self-produced and released their fourth album, "The Eleventh Hour", which earned them a Grammy award for the third album in a row. The album relied on studio musicians and the band's touring musicians to fill in for the band's lack of drummer and bass player. Concerts from the subsequent "Eleventh Hour Tour" were recorded for later projects, including the release of a live concert DVD, .
The double-disc "" features an acoustic disc and a live disc. The acoustic disc consisted of reworked and rearranged fan favorites, two "The Eleventh Hour" b-sides, and a cover of Adam Again's "Dig". The latter was actually intended for a tribute album for Gene Eugene, who had died recently. The live disc features a recent concert recording that include songs from throughout the band's career.
The band continued the acoustic and organic approach that was featured on "Furthermore" for their fifth studio album entitled "Who We Are Instead", which released on November 4, 2003. On the album, the band revisited various styles they had used previously, as well as experimenting with new influences, such as gospel, hymns, and Nickel Creek's "newgrass" style.
In early 2005, the band released "Redemption Songs", a collection of hymns and traditional songs. The band wrote new melodies to some old hymns and rearranged the music for several others. "God Will Lift Up Your Head", reworked as an acoustic rocker, was a hit for the band on Christian radio. They also covered five hymns from the "Indelible Grace" CD series (a series which originated from the work of Reformed University Fellowship).
In late 2005, the band announced that the writing process for a new studio album was nearing completion, and that they would be returning to the studio to record the album in the early part of the year. This new project, entitled "Good Monsters", was released on September 5, 2006. Backstage at the 2006 GMA Awards, Jars of Clay labeled the album their first ever rock record. In the September 2006 edition of "CCM Magazine", the band credited fellow artist Ashley Cleveland with inspiring the improvisational sound of the album. The magazine called it "the most profound album the Christian music community has released in years."
Late 2000s.
On September 4, 2007, two albums from the band were released simultaneously. The first was a mainstream release of "Live Monsters", an EP of live concert recordings of songs, originally recorded for "Good Monsters" and that had been previously released through the iTunes Store and the official Jars of Clay online store. The second release, through Essential/Legacy, was a greatest hits album, "The Essential Jars of Clay".On April 1, 2008, Essential Records released the band's third greatest hits album, the second in the past year, "Greatest Hits". Included was the new song "Love is the Protest". In mid-2007, the song "Good Monsters" was featured in the pilot of the television show "Eli Stone". Additionally, the song "Work" was used in promotional material for the Fox Television network shows "Bones" and "House".
In March 2007, the band announced at a concert in Des Moines, Iowa that they were no longer on Essential Records and would now be releasing music independently. Later, press releases announced the name of their label as Gray Matters, which would be a partnership with Nettwerk Music Group. Along with the announcement of their new label, the band mentioned that they are planning to record the soundtrack to , a documentary about Milton and Fred Ochieng' - brothers from the African village training to be doctors in the States, working to build a clinic in their home town. The band's first release through Gray Matters was a full-length Christmas album, "Christmas Songs", on October 16, 2007.
On July 29, 2008, Gray Matters Records released "Closer EP" exclusively through online digital music stores. It was subsequently released on CD on August 19, 2008. It included reworked versions of "Flood", called "Flood (New Rain)", and "Love Song For a Savior ('08)" from their debut album. It also included "Prisoner of Hope", which is not found on any other Jars album. On December 8, 2008, the song "Closer" was featured in the 12th episode of the television show "Privileged".
The band's tenth studio album, "The Long Fall Back to Earth", was released on April 21, 2009. and contained 14 songs, including "Closer" and "Safe to Land", from the "Closer EP", and is influenced by 80s music, specifically Tears For Fears and The Cure. "The Long Fall Back to Earth" debuted at No. 29 on the "Billboard" 200 mainstream charts, which was Jars of Clay's highest debut since "The Eleventh Hour" which debuted at No. 28 in 2002. The first radio single off the album is "Two Hands", which peaked at No. 6 on the Hot Christian Songs chart. The second single off the album is "Heaven." The song "Hero" was featured on a trailer for NBC's "Kings". "The Long Fall Back to Earth" was nominated for the Grammy to the "Best Pop/Contemporary Gospel Album", though they didn't win in the category.
Jars of Clay released the first EP of the "Live at Gray Matters" series on the February 5, 2009.
"The Shelter" was released October 5, 2010 and features eleven tracks. During their promotion for the album, the band streamed the entire album for a few days before its release on their website. Also, while promoting the upcoming album, the band shared several tracks on the K-LOVE Christian radio stations and AIR-1. As a part of the charitable campaign, the band played three songs from "The Shelter" on the radio, including "We Will Follow," "No Greater Love," and the title track. In early 2011 they toured the United States on the Rock And Worship Roadshow headlined by MercyMe.
In July 2012, the band traveled to Portland, Oregon to begin recording "Inland" at Flora Recording & Playback, a music studio owned and operated by Tucker Martine. The new album was released on August 27, 2013 and features twelve tracks. On March 18, 2013, the band released an exclusive track, "Love in Hard Times", that could only be acquired with the purchase of their EP "Under the Weather (Live in Sellersville, PA)" directly from their website. On June 17, 2013, the band released a free download of the song "Inland" through Rolling Stone's website. The first single off of the album, "After the Fight", was released on June 18.
Blood:Water Mission.
Lead singer Dan Haseltine visited Africa in 2002, which in turn inspired the founding of , a non-profit organization created to raise awareness and money for the poverty and AIDS stricken regions of the continent. The name is derived from, as Haseltine says, "The two things Africa needs most" - clean blood and clean water. The mission has begun the 1000 Wells project, an effort to have a thousand new wells built throughout Africa. The group recently met their goal of providing clean water to 1,000 African communities through the organization they founded, Blood:Water Mission, and its 1,000 Wells Project. Former Bassist for Jars of Clay Aaron Sands serves as Administrative Director for the project.
Beliefs.
In a 2002 interview with NPR's Scott Simon on "Weekend Edition Saturday", responding to a question about the relatively subtle religious content of their music, Haseltine said, "our songs ... not really there to explain our faith," but are "written about our life that is affected by our faith." Haseltine explained the decision to "shy away from ... traditional religious language" as a conscious one, in part to make their music more accessible to those "put off by religion", and to "love people in a way that isn't exclusive to simply people that understand the language of Christianity." Haseltine also stated that art can "make people feel what's true rather than telling them".
Awards.
Jars of Clay has been successful in being nominated for and winning several awards, including prestigious Grammy Awards and several of the Christian music awards, known as the GMA Dove Awards. Some of these successes have been collaborative efforts, including two "City on a Hill" albums and the for the 2005 film "". The group has won five Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) awards.
In June 2009, Jars of Clay was named as one of PeaceByPeace.com's first peace heroes.

</doc>
<doc id="54566" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54566" title="7 Up">
7 Up

7 Up is a brand of lemon-lime flavored, non-caffeinated soft drink. The rights to the brand are held by Dr Pepper Snapple Group in the United States, and PepsiCo (or its licensees) in the rest of the world. The U.S. version of the "7 Up" logo includes a red cherry between the "7" and "Up"; this red cherry has been animated and used as a mascot for the brand as Cool Spot.
History.
7 Up was created by Charles Leiper Grigg, who launched his St. Louis–based company The Howdy Corporation in 1920. Grigg came up with the formula for a lemon-lime soft drink in 1929. The product, originally named "Bib-Label Lithiated Lemon-Lime Soda", was launched two weeks before the Wall Street Crash of 1929. It contained lithium citrate, a mood-stabilizing drug, until 1950. It was one of a number of patent medicine products popular in the late-19th and early-20th centuries.
Westinghouse bought 7 Up in 1969 and sold it in 1978 to Philip Morris, who then in 1986 sold it to a group led by the investment firm Hicks & Haas. 7 Up merged with Dr Pepper in 1988; Cadbury Schweppes bought the combined company in 1995. The Dr Pepper Snapple Group was spun off from Cadbury Schweppes in 2008.
Formula.
7 Up has been reformulated several times since its launch in 1929. In 2006, the version of the product sold in the U.S. was re-formulated so that it could be marketed as being "100% natural". This was achieved by eliminating the chelating-agent calcium disodium EDTA, and replacing sodium citrate with potassium citrate in order to reduce the beverage's sodium content. This re-formulation contains no fruit juice and, in the U.S., is sweetened with high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS). The manufacturing process used in the production of HFCS has led some public health and advocacy groups to challenge the ad campaign's "natural" claims. In 2007, after the Center for Science in the Public Interest threatened to sue 7 Up, it was announced that 7 Up would stop being marketed as "100% natural". Instead, It is now promoted as having "100% Natural Flavors". The controversy does not extend to other countries, such as the United Kingdom, where HFCS is not generally used in foods, including 7 Up. In 2011, 7 Up began test-marketing a formula, called 7 Up Retro, using sugar rather than HFCS. Container labels sport the caption, "Made With Real Sugar".
There exists a myth that the 7 Up name comes from the drink having a pH over 7. That would make it neutral or alkaline on the scale; however, this is not the case, as the 7 Up pH is close to 3.79, similar to other drinks of the type. The real origin of the name is unclear, though Britvic claims that the name comes from the seven main ingredients in the drink, while others have claimed that the number was a coded reference to the lithium contained in the original recipe, which has an atomic mass of approximately 7.
Variations.
Barbecue sauces and marinades.
In 2007, Cadbury Schweppes entered into a licensing partnership with Vita Food Products to produce a line of barbecue sauces and marinades flavored with Dr Pepper, 7 Up and A&W Root Beer.
Slogans and advertising campaigns.
The television cartoon character Fido Dido was used as a mascot from the late 1980s through the early 1990s, and was re-introduced in international markets in the early 2000s.
Fresh-Up Freddie was the rooster mascot for 7 Up in the 1950s. He gave viewers lessons about how to plan successful parties and picnics by having a plenty of 7 Up on hand. The commercials were produced by Disney, giving the character the specific Disney look of the time. Freddie was a crossover between Panchito rooster from "The Three Caballeros" and zany Aracuan Bird from the same film. Fresh-Up Freddie often was dressed in human clothes. Freddie also appeared in Zorro 1957 series commercial intermissions. Here, he was put against Pete the Cat. Fresh-Up Freddie also had a minor merchandise of his own. He was voiced by Paul Frees.

</doc>
<doc id="54570" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54570" title="History of Fiji">
History of Fiji

The timeline below shows the history of Fiji, from the ancient times to the present day.

</doc>
<doc id="54571" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54571" title="Geography of Fiji">
Geography of Fiji

Fiji is a group of volcanic islands in the South Pacific, lying about 4,450 km (2,775 mi) southwest of Honolulu and 1,770 km (1,100 mi) north of New Zealand. Of the 332 islands and 522 smaller islets making up the archipelago, about 106 are permanently inhabited. Viti Levu, the largest island, covers about 57% of the nation's land area, hosts the two official cities (the capital Suva, and Lautoka) and most other major towns, such as Nausori, Vaileka, Ba, Tavua, Kororvou, Nasinu, and Nadi (the site of the international airport), and contains some 69% of the population. Vanua Levu, 64 km to the north of Viti Levu, covers just over 30% of the land area though is home to only some 15% of the population. Its main towns are Labasa and Savusavu. In the northeast it features Natewa Bay, carving out the Loa peninsula.
Both islands are mountainous, with peaks up to 1300 m rising abruptly from the shore, and covered with tropical forests. Heavy rains (up to 304 cm or 120 inches annually) fall on the windward (southeastern) side, covering these sections of the islands with dense tropical forest. Lowlands on the western portions of each of the main islands are sheltered by the mountains and have a well-marked dry season favorable to crops such as sugarcane.
Other islands and island groups, which cover just 12.5% of the land area and house some 16% of the population, include Taveuni southeast off Vanua Levu and Kadavu Island, south off Viti Levu (the third and fourth largest islands respectively), the Mamanuca Group (just off Nadi) and Yasawa Group (to the north of the Mamanucas), which are popular tourist destinations, the Lomaiviti Group (just off Suva) with Levuka, the former capital and the only major town on any of the smaller islands, located on the island of Ovalau, and the remote Lau Group over the Koro Sea to the east near Tonga, from which it is separated by the Lakeba Passage.
Two outlying regions are Rotuma, 400 km to the north, and the uninhabited coral atoll and cay Ceva-i-Ra or Conway Reef, 450 km to the southwest of main Fiji. Culturally conservative Rotuma with its 2000 people on 44 km2 geographically belongs to Polynesia, and enjoys relative autonomy as a Fijian dependency.
Fiji Television reported on 21 September 2006 that the Fiji Islands Maritime and Safety Administration (FIMSA), while reviewing its outdated maritime charts, had discovered the possibility that more islands could lie within Fiji's Exclusive Economic Zone.
More than half of Fiji's population lives on the island coasts, either in Suva or in smaller urban centers. The interior is sparsely populated because of its rough terrain.
Extreme points.
This is a list of the extreme points of Fiji, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.
Antipodes.
The antipodes of Fiji are in eastern Mali, around the northernmost bend of the Niger River. The small western island of Yasawa is antipodal to the Niger about 50 km from Timbuktu, whereas the eastern cape of Vanua Levu corresponds to the old imperial city of Gao.
The antipodes of the dependency of Rotuma are in Burkina Faso, west of Ouagadougou.

</doc>
<doc id="54573" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54573" title="Cadbury">
Cadbury

Cadbury is a British multinational confectionery company wholly owned by American company Mondelez International (originally Kraft Foods) since 2010. It is the second largest confectionery brand in the world after Wrigley's. Cadbury is headquartered in Uxbridge, Greater London and operates in more than fifty countries worldwide. It is famous for its Dairy Milk chocolate, the Creme Egg and Roses selection box, and many other confectionery products. One of the best known British brands, in 2013 "The Telegraph" named Cadbury among Britain's most successful exports.
Cadbury was established in Birmingham, England in 1824, by John Cadbury who sold tea, coffee and drinking chocolate. Cadbury developed the business with his brother Benjamin, followed by his sons Richard and George. George developed the Bournville estate, a model village designed to give the company's workers improved living conditions. Dairy Milk chocolate, introduced in 1905, used a higher proportion of milk within the recipe compared with rival products. By 1914, the chocolate was the company's best-selling product. Cadbury, alongside Rowntree's and Fry, were the big three British confectionery manufacturers throughout much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 
Cadbury was granted its first Royal Warrant from Queen Victoria in 1854. It has been a holder of a Royal Warrant from Elizabeth II since 1955. Cadbury merged with J. S. Fry & Sons in 1919, and Schweppes in 1969. Cadbury was a constant constituent of the FTSE 100 on the London Stock Exchange from the index's 1984 inception until the company was bought by Kraft Foods in 2010.
History.
1824–1900: Early history.
In 1824, John Cadbury, a Quaker, began selling tea, coffee and drinking chocolate in Bull Street in Birmingham, England. From 1831 he moved into the production of a variety of cocoa and drinking chocolates, made in a factory in Bridge Street and sold mainly to the wealthy because of the high cost of production. In 1847 John Cadbury became a partner with his brother Benjamin and the company became known as "Cadbury Brothers".
The brothers opened an office in London, and in 1854 they received the Royal Warrant as manufacturers of chocolate and cocoa to Queen Victoria. The company went into decline in the late 1850s.
John Cadbury's sons Richard and George took over the business in 1861. At the time of the takeover, the business was in rapid decline: the number of employees had reduced from 20 to 11, and the company was losing money. By 1864 Cadbury was profitable again. The brothers had turned around the business by moving the focus from tea and coffee to chocolate, and by increasing the quality of their products.
The firm's first major breakthrough occurred in 1866 when Richard and George introduced an improved cocoa into Britain. A new cocoa press developed in the Netherlands removed some of the unpalatable cocoa butter from the cocoa bean. The firm began exporting its products in the 1850s. In the 1880s the firm began to produce chocolate confectioneries.
In 1878 the brothers decided to build new premises in countryside four miles from Birmingham. The move to the countryside was unprecedented in business. Better transport access for milk that was inward shipped by canal, and cocoa that was brought in by rail from London, Southampton and Liverpool docks was taken into consideration. With the development of the Birmingham West Suburban Railway along the path of the Worcester and Birmingham Canal, they acquired the Bournbrook estate, comprising of countryside south of the outskirts of Birmingham. Located next to the Stirchley Street railway station, which itself was opposite the canal, they renamed the estate Bournville and opened the Bournville factory the following year.
In 1893, George Cadbury bought of land close to the works and planned, at his own expense, a model village which would 'alleviate the evils of modern more cramped living conditions'. By 1900 the estate included 314 cottages and houses set on of land. As the Cadbury family were Quakers there were no pubs in the estate.
In 1897, following the lead of Swiss companies, Cadbury introduced its own line of milk chocolate bars. In 1899 Cadbury became a private limited company.
1900–1969.
In 1905, Cadbury launched its Dairy Milk bar, a production of exceptional quality with a higher proportion of milk than previous chocolate bars. Developed by George Cadbury Jr, it was the first time a British company had been able to mass-produce milk chocolate. From the beginning, it had the distinctive purple wrapper. It was a great sales success, and became the company's best selling product by 1914. The stronger Bournville Cocoa line was introduced in 1906. Cadbury Dairy Milk and Bournville Cocoa were to provide the basis for the company's rapid pre-war expansion. In 1910, Cadbury sales overtook those of Fry for the first time.
Cadbury's Milk Tray was first produced in 1915 and continued in production throughout the remainder of the First World War. More than 2,000 of Cadbury's male employees joined the British Armed Forces, and to support the British war effort, Cadbury provided chocolate, books and clothing to the troops. George Cadbury handed over two company owned buildings for use as hospitals – “The Beeches” and “Fircroft”, and the management of both hospitals earned the War Office’s highest award. Factory girls, dubbed ‘The Cadbury Angels’, volunteered to do the laundry of injured soldiers recovering in the hospitals. After the war, the Bournville factory was redeveloped and mass production began in earnest. In 1918, Cadbury opened their first overseas factory in Hobart, Tasmania.
In 1919 Cadbury merged with J. S. Fry & Sons, another leading British chocolate manufacturer, resulting in the integration of well-known brands such as Fry's Chocolate Cream and Fry's Turkish Delight. In 1921, the many small Fry's factories around Bristol were closed down, and production was consolidated at a new Somerdale Factory, outside Bristol.
Cadbury soon expanded its product range with Flake (1920), Creme eggs (1923), Fruit and Nut (1928), and Crunchie (1929) (originally under the Fry's label). By 1930 Cadbury had become the 24th largest British manufacturing company as measured by estimated market value of capital. Cadbury took direct control of the under-performing Fry in 1935. Dairy Milk Whole Nut arrived in 1933, and Roses were introduced in 1938.
Chocolate ceased to be a luxury product and became affordable to the working classes for the first time. By the mid-1930s, Cadbury estimated that 90 percent of the British population could afford to buy chocolate. By 1936, Dairy Milk accounted for 60 percent of the UK milk chocolate market.
During World War II, parts of the Bournville factory were turned over to war work, producing milling machines and seats for fighter aircraft. Workers ploughed football fields to plant crops. As chocolate was regarded as an essential food, it was placed under government supervision for the entire war. The wartime rationing of chocolate ended in 1950, and normal production resumed. Cadbury subsequently invested in new factories and had an increasing demand for their products. In 1952 the Moreton factory was built.
Cadbury has been a holder of a Royal Warrant from Queen Elizabeth II since 1955. In 1967 Cadbury acquired an Australian confectioner, MacRobertson's, beating a rival bid from Mars. As a result of the takeover, Cadbury built a 60 percent market share in the Australian market.
Schweppes merger (1969).
Cadbury merged with drinks company Schweppes to form Cadbury Schweppes in 1969. Head of Schweppes, Lord Watkinson, became chairman, and Adrian Cadbury became deputy chairman and managing director. The benefits of the merger were to prove elusive.
The merger put an end to Cadbury's close links to its Quaker founding family and its perceived social ethos by instilling a capitalist venturer philosophy in management.
In 1978 the company acquired Peter Paul, the third largest chocolate manufacturer in the United States for $58 million, which gave it a 10 percent share of the world's largest confectionery market. The highly successful Wispa chocolate bar was launched in the North East of England in 1981, and nationwide in 1984. In 1982, trading profits were greater outside of Britain than in the UK for the first time.
In 1986, Cadbury Schweppes sold its Beverages and Foods division to a management buyout known as Premier Brands for £97 million. This saw the company divest itself of such brands as Typhoo Tea, Kenco, Smash and Hartley Chivers jam. The deal also saw Premier take the licence for production of Cadbury brand biscuits and drinking chocolate.
Meanwhile, Schweppes switched its alliance in the UK from Pepsi to Coca-Cola, taking a 51 percent stake in the joint venture Coca-Cola Schweppes. The acquisition of Canada Dry doubled its worldwide drinks market share, and it took a 30 percent stake in Dr Pepper. As a result of these acquisitions, Cadbury Schweppes became the third largest soft drinks manufacturer in the world.
Snapple, Mistic and Stewart's (formerly Cable Car Beverage) were sold by Triarc to Cadbury Schweppes in 2000 for $1.45  billion. In October of that same year, Cadbury Schweppes purchased Royal Crown from Triarc.
Schweppes demerger.
In March 2007, it was revealed that Cadbury Schweppes was planning to split its business into two separate entities: one focusing on its main chocolate and confectionery market; the other on its US drinks business. The demerger took effect on 2 May 2008, with the drinks business becoming Dr Pepper Snapple Group. In December 2008 it was announced that Cadbury was to sell its Australian beverage unit to Asahi Breweries.
2003 Name rebrand.
In 2003, Cadbury dropped the 's' from its name and renamed the brand to Cadbury. The company found that it was a much more suited, rounded name than the previous "Cadbury's". This change was announced on the 19th of December 2002.
2007–2010.
In October 2007, Cadbury announced the closure of the Somerdale Factory, Keynsham, formerly part of Fry's. Between 500 and 700 jobs were affected by this change. Production transferred to other plants in England and Poland.
In 2008 Monkhill Confectionery, the Own Label trading division of Cadbury Trebor Bassett was sold to Tangerine Confectionery for £58 million cash. This sale included factories at Pontefract, Cleckheaton and York and a distribution centre near Chesterfield, and the transfer of around 800 employees.
In mid-2009 Cadbury replaced some of the cocoa butter in their non-UK chocolate products with palm oil. Despite stating this was a response to consumer demand to improve taste and texture, there was no "new improved recipe" claim placed on New Zealand labels. Consumer backlash was significant from environmentalists and chocolate lovers. By August 2009, the company announced that it was reverting to the use of cocoa butter in New Zealand. In addition, they would source cocoa beans through Fair Trade channels. In January 2010 prospective buyer Kraft pledged to honour Cadbury's commitment.
Acquisition by Kraft Foods.
On 7 September 2009 Kraft Foods made a £10.2 billion (US$16.2 billion) indicative takeover bid for Cadbury. The offer was rejected, with Cadbury stating that it undervalued the company. Kraft launched a formal, hostile bid for Cadbury valuing the firm at £9.8 billion on 9 November 2009. The UK Business Secretary Peter Mandelson warned Kraft not to try to "make a quick buck" from the acquisition of Cadbury.
On 19 January 2010, it was announced that Cadbury and Kraft Foods had reached a deal and that Kraft would purchase Cadbury for £8.40 per share, valuing Cadbury at £11.5bn (US$18.9bn). Kraft, which issued a statement stating that the deal will create a "global confectionery leader", had to borrow £7 billion (US$11.5bn) in order to finance the takeover.
The Hershey Company, based in Pennsylvania, manufactures and distributes Cadbury-branded chocolate (but not its other confectionery) in the United States and has been reported to share Cadbury's "ethos". Hershey had expressed an interest in buying Cadbury because it would broaden its access to faster-growing international markets. But on 22 January 2010, Hershey announced that it would not counter Kraft's final offer.
The acquisition of Cadbury faced widespread disapproval from the British public, as well as groups and organisations including trade union Unite, who fought against the acquisition of the company which, according to Prime Minister Gordon Brown, was very important to the British economy. Unite estimated that a takeover by Kraft could put 30,000 jobs "at risk", and UK shareholders protested over the mergers and acquisitions advisory fees charged by banks. Cadbury's M&A advisers were UBS, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. Controversially, RBS, a bank 84% owned by the United Kingdom Government, funded the Kraft takeover.
On 2 February 2010, Kraft secured over 71% of Cadbury's shares thus finalising the deal. Kraft had needed to reach 75% of the shares in order to be able to delist Cadbury from the stock market and fully integrate it as part of Kraft. This was achieved on 5 February 2010, and the company announced that Cadbury shares would be de-listed on 8 March 2010.
On 3 February 2010, the Chairman Roger Carr, chief executive Todd Stitzer and chief financial officer Andrew Bonfield all announced their resignations. Stitzer had worked at the company for 27 years.
On 9 February 2010, Kraft announced that they were planning to close the Somerdale Factory, Keynsham, with the loss of 400 jobs. The management explained that existing plans to move production to Poland were too advanced to be realistically reversed, though assurances had been given regarding sustaining the plant. Staff at Keynsham criticised this move, suggesting that they felt betrayed and as if they have been "sacked twice". On 22 April 2010, Phil Rumbol, the man behind the famous Gorilla advertisement, announced his plans to leave the Cadbury company in July following Kraft's takeover.
In June 2010 the Polish division, Cadbury-Wedel, was sold to Lotte of Korea. The European Commission made the sale a condition of the Kraft takeover. As part of the deal Kraft will keep the Cadbury, Hall's and other brands along with two plants in Skarbimierz. Lotte will take over the plant in Warsaw along with the E Wedel brand.
On 4 August 2011, Kraft Foods announced they would be splitting into two companies beginning on 1 October 2012. The confectionery business of Kraft became Mondelēz International, of which Cadbury is a subsidiary.
Operations.
Head office.
Cadbury has its head office at Cadbury House in the Uxbridge Business Park in Uxbridge, London Borough of Hillingdon, England.
The building occupies of leased space inside Building 3 of the business park. After acquiring Cadbury, Kraft confirmed that the company would remain at Cadbury House.
Cadbury relocated to Uxbridge from its previous head office at 25 Berkeley Square in Mayfair, City of Westminster in 2007 as a cost-saving measure. In 1992 the company leased the space for £55 per ; by 2002 this had reached £68.75 per square foot.
Production sites.
Bournville.
Bournville employs almost 1000 people. In 2014, Mondelez announced a £75 million investment in the site.
Bournville is home to Mondelez's Global Centre of Excellence for Chocolate research and development, so every new chocolate product created by the company anywhere in the world starts life at the Birmingham plant.
Markets.
United Kingdom.
The confectionery business in the UK is called Cadbury (formerly Cadbury Trebor Bassett) and, as of August 2004, had eight factories and 3,000 staff in the UK. Biscuits bearing the Cadbury brand, such as Cadbury Fingers, are produced under licence by Burton's Foods. Cadbury also owns Trebor Bassett, Fry's and Maynards
Ice cream based on Cadbury products, like 99 Flake, is made under licence by Frederick's Dairies. Cadbury cakes and chocolate spread are manufactured under licence by Premier Foods, but the cakes were originally part of Cadbury Foods Ltd with factories at Blackpole in Worcester and Moreton on the Wirral, with distribution depots throughout the UK.
Other Kraft subsidiaries in the UK include: Cadbury Two LLP, Cadbury UK Holdings Limited, Cadbury US Holdings Limited, Cadbury Four LLP, Cadbury Holdings Limited, and Cadbury One LLP.
Ireland.
Cadbury Ireland Limited is based in Coolock in Dublin, where the headquarters of Cadbury Ireland are located, and Tallaght. The third is in Rathmore, County Kerry. Products made by Cadbury in Ireland include Cadbury Dairy Milk, Twirl, Flake, and Boost.
United States.
Cadbury Adams produces candy, gum, breath mints and cough drops. It is headquartered in Parsippany, New Jersey. The company was formed after the then Cadbury Schweppes purchased the Adams brand from Pfizer in December 2002 for US$4.2 billion.
American Chicle was purchased by Warner-Lambert in 1962; Warner-Lambert renamed the unit Adams in 1997 and merged with Pfizer in 2000.
In 1978 Cadbury merged with Peter Paul, makers of Mounds and Almond Joy. In 1988 The Hershey Company acquired the U.S. rights to their chocolate business. Accordingly, although the Cadbury group's chocolate products have been sold in the U.S. since 1988, the products are manufactured by Hershey, causing complaints by consumers, who claim they are inferior to the originals. Before the May 2008 demerger, the North American business also contained beverage unit Cadbury Schweppes Americas Beverages. In 1982, Cadbury Schweppes purchased the Duffy-Mott Company.
Cadbury Adams' products include:
Australia and New Zealand.
Cadbury's products were first imported into Australia as early as 1853 when 3 cases of Cadbury's cocoa and chocolate were advertised for sale in Adelaide. Cadbury’s first overseas order in 1881 was made for the Australian market. In 1919, as part of its plans to expand internationally, the company decided to build a factory in Australia. In 1920 Claremont, Tasmania was chosen for the location because of its close proximity to the city of Hobart, good source of inexpensive hydro-electricity and plentiful supply of high-quality fresh milk. The first products from the factory were sold in 1922. The Claremont factory was modelled on Bournville, with its own village and sporting facilities., 
Cadbury operates three Australian factories as well as one in New Zealand; two in Melbourne, Victoria (Ringwood and Scoresby), one in Hobart, Tasmania (Claremont), and one in Dunedin, New Zealand. The Claremont factory was once a popular tourist attraction and operated daily tours; however, the factory ceased running full tours mid-2008, citing health and safety reasons. Cadbury has been upgrading its manufacturing facility at Claremont, Tasmania, Australia, since 2001 
On 27 February 2009 the confectionery and beverages businesses of Cadbury Schweppes in Australia were formally separated and the beverages business began operating as Schweppes Australia Pty Ltd. In April 2009, Schweppes Australia was acquired by Asahi Breweries.
In late June 2012, Cadbury introduced Marvellous Creations a new chocolate range with three flavours – Peanut Toffee Cookie, Jelly Crunchie Bits or Jelly Popping Candy Beanies covered in Dairy Milk Chocolate.
Canada.
Cadbury Canada produces and/or imports several products that are sold under the Cadbury and Maynards labels, including the following:
Cadbury Canada is now part of Mondelez Canada and products are featured on the Snackworks website.
India.
In 1948, Cadbury India began its operations in India by importing chocolates. On 19 July 1948, Cadbury was incorporated in India. It now has manufacturing facilities in Thane, Induri (Pune) and Malanpur (Gwalior), Hyderabad, Bangalore and Baddi (Himachal Pradesh) and sales offices in New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai. The corporate head office is in Mumbai. The head office is presently situated at Pedder Road, Mumbai, under the name of "Cadbury House". This monumental structure at Pedder Road has been a landmark for the citizens of Mumbai since its creation. Since 1965 Cadbury has also pioneered the development of cocoa cultivation in India. For over two decades, Cadbury has worked with the Kerala Agricultural University to undertake cocoa research.
Currently, Cadbury India operates in five categories – Chocolate confectionery, Beverages, Biscuits, Gum and Candy. Some of the key brands are Cadbury Dairy Milk, Bournvita, 5 Star, Perk, Bournville, Celebrations, Gems, Halls, Éclairs, Bubbaloo, Tang and Oreo. Its products include Cadbury Dairy Milk, Dairy Milk Silk, Bournville, 5-Star, Temptations, Perk, Gems (a version of M&M's), Eclairs, Bournvita, Celebrations, Bilkul Cadbury Dairy Milk Shots, Toblerone, Halls, Tang and Oreo.
It is the market leader in the chocolate confectionery business with a market share of over 70%.
On 21 April 2014, Cadbury India changed its name to Mondelez India Foods Limited.
Malta.
In 2012, Alf Mizzi & Sons Marketing (Ltd) took over the importation and distribution of Cadbury, as well as several other Modelez brands. Most of the Cadbury products are imported directly from the UK. The advertising of the brand was taken over by Sloane Ltd, which proved to be highly successful in creating market specific commercials, reaching the most amount of people ever through digital advertising.
Advertising.
The Cadbury signature logo is derived from the signature of William Cadbury. It was adopted as the worldwide logo in the 1970s.
Executive pay.
In 2008 Todd Stitzer, Cadbury's CEO, was paid a £2,665,000 bonus. Combined with his annual salary of £985,000 and other payments of £448,000 this gives a total remuneration of over £4 million.
Accounting.
In July 2007, Cadbury Schweppes announced that it would be outsourcing its transactional accounting and order capture functions to Shared Business Services (SBS) centres run by a company called Genpact, (a businesses services provider) in India, China, and Romania. This was to affect all business units and be associated with US and UK functions being transferred to India by the end of 2007, with all units transferred by mid-2009. Depending on the success of this move, other accounting Human Resources functions may follow. This development is likely to lead to the loss of several hundred jobs worldwide, but also to several hundred jobs being created, at lower salaries commensurate with wages paid in developing countries.
Products.
Major chocolate brands produced by Cadbury include the bars Dairy Milk, Crunchie, Caramel, Wispa, Boost, Picnic, Flake, Curly Wurly, Chomp, and Fudge; chocolate Buttons; the boxed chocolate brand Milk Tray; and the twist-wrapped chocolates Heroes.
As well as Cadbury's chocolate, the company also owns Maynards and Halls, and is associated with several types of confectionery including former Trebor and Bassett's brands or products such as Liquorice Allsorts, Jelly Babies, Flumps, Mints, Black Jack chews, Trident gum, and Softmints.
Notable product introductions include:
Recent health and safety controversies.
2006 Salmonella scare.
On 19 January 2006, Cadbury Schweppes detected a rare strain of the "Salmonella" bacteria, affecting seven of its products, said to have been caused by a leaking pipe. The leak occurred at its Marlbrook plant, in Herefordshire, which produces chocolate crumb mixture; the mixture is then transported to factories at Bournville and formerly Somerdale to be turned into milk chocolate.
It was not until around six months after the leak was detected that Cadbury Schweppes officially notified the Food Standards Agency, shortly after which it recalled more than a million chocolate bars.
In December 2006, the company announced that the cost of dealing with the contamination would reach £30  million.
In April 2007, Birmingham City Council announced that it would be prosecuting Cadbury Schweppes in relation to three alleged offences of breaching food safety legislation. At that time, the Health Protection Agency identified 31 people who had been infected with Salmonella Montevideo. One of the alleged victims had to be kept on a hospital isolation ward for five days after eating a Cadbury's caramel bar. An investigation being carried out at that time by Herefordshire Council led to a further six charges being brought. The company pleaded guilty to all nine charges, and was fined one million pounds at Birmingham Crown Court—the sentencing of both cases was brought together. Analysts have said the fine is not material to the group, with mitigating factors limiting the fine being that the company quickly admitted its guilt and said it had been mistaken that the infection did not pose a threat to health.
2007 recalls.
On 10 February 2007, Cadbury announced they would be recalling a range of products due to a labelling error. The products were produced in a factory handling nuts, potential allergens, but this was not made clear on the packaging. As a precaution, all items were recalled.
On 14 September 2007, Cadbury Schweppes investigated a manufacturing error over allergy warning, recalling for the second time in two years thousands of chocolate bars. A printing mistake at Somerdale Factory resulted in the omission of tree nut allergy labels from 250g Dairy Milk Double Chocolate bars.
2008 melamine contamination in three Beijing factories.
On 29 September 2008 Cadbury withdrew all of its 11 chocolate products made in its three Beijing factories, on suspicion of contamination with melamine. The recall affected the mainland China markets, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Australia. Products recalled included Dark Chocolate, a number of products in the 'Dairy Milk' range and Chocolate Éclairs.
2009 Hydrogenation.
Cadbury continues to use hydrogenated oils in many of its signature products. Although trans fats are present, the nutrition labels round the values down to zero.
2014 pork traces in Malaysia.
Cadbury recalled two chocolate products after it was tested positive for traces of pork DNA, namely Cadbury Dairy Milk Hazelnut and Cadbury Dairy Milk Roast Almond. The traces were found during a periodic check for non-halal ingredients in food products by the Ministry of Health in Malaysia which on 24 May 2014 said two of three samples of the company's products may contain pork traces.
On 2 June 2014, Malaysia's Department of Islamic Development (JAKIM) declared that the sample did not contain pig DNA, as claimed in earlier reports. This statement was made after new tests were conducted.
JAKIM reportedly said in a statement that they tested 11 samples of Cadbury Dairy Milk Hazelnut, Cadbury Dairy Milk Roast Almond and other products from the company's factory but none of them tested positive for pork. The investigation followed reports that unscheduled checks had shown that two chocolates produced by Mondelez International Inc., the parent company of Cadbury, violated Islamic law and led to a boycott of all its products in the country.
See also.
General: 

</doc>
<doc id="54574" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54574" title="Demographics of Fiji">
Demographics of Fiji

The demographic characteristics of the population of Fiji are known through censuses, usually conducted in ten-year intervals, and has been analysed by statistical bureaus since the 1880s. The Fijian Bureau of Statistics (FBOS) has performed this task since 1996, the first enumerated Fiji census when an independent country. The 2007 census found that the permanent population of Fiji was 837,000. The population density at the time was 45.8 inhabitants per square kilometre, and the overall life expectancy in Fiji was 72.1 years. Since the 1930s the population of Fiji has increased at a rate of 1.1% per year. Since the 1950s, Fiji's birth rate has continuously exceeded its death rate. The population is dominated by the 15–64 age segment. The median age of the population was 27.9, and the gender ratio of the total population was 1.03 males per 1 female.
Indigenous Fijians, the native inhabitants of Fiji, are a mixture of Polynesian and Melanesian, resulting from the original migrations to the South Pacific over time. The Indo-Fijian population increased rapidly from the 61,000 people brought from India between 1879 and 1916 to work in the sugarcane fields, many who later would lease/own the sugar cane plantations. Thousands more Indians migrated voluntarily in the 1920s and 1930s and formed the core of Fiji's business class.
In 1977 "The Economist" reported that ethnic Fijians were a minority of 255,000, in a total population of 600,000 of which fully half were of Indian descent, with the remainder Chinese, European and of mixed ancestry. Fiji shares with Kazakhstan the distinction of its indigenous ethnic group having been a minority in its own country in recent history but having since regained its majority, in both cases due to large-scale emigration and lower birth rates of the non-indigenous ethnic population.
The native Fijians live throughout the country, while the Indo-Fijians reside primarily near the urban centres and in the cane-producing areas of the two main islands. Nearly all of the indigenous Fijians are Christian, with some two-thirds being Methodist. The Indo-Fijians, by contrast, have a similar religious mix as their homeland: some 77 percent of the Indo-Fijians are Hindu, with a further 16 percent being Muslim and 6 percent Christian. There are also a few Sikhs.
A national census is supposed to be conducted every ten years, but the census intended for 2006 was postponed until 2007. Finance Minister Ratu Jone Kubuabola announced on 27 October 2005 that the Cabinet had decided that it would not be in the country's interest to have a census and a general election in the same year. "Peoples’ focus on the elections could have an impact on their cooperation with census officials", he said. The Statistics Office supported Kubuabola's announcement, saying that public interest in the general election would likely distract people's attention from the census, making it problematic to conduct.
Ethnic groups.
According to the 2007 Census of Fiji, the number of Fijians increased from 393,575 to 475,739, while the number of Indians decreased from 338,818 to 313,798. According to government statistics, the latest estimated population of Indigenous Fijians is counted at 511,838, while there are 290,129 Indians and 56,071 Others (January 2012).
Religions (1996 census).
† Includes atheists and agnostics.
Source: Fiji Statistics Department
As of the end of 2006 the LDS church reports 14,448 members in Fiji, which equal about 1.4% of the population. The LDS church also operates a temple in Fiji.
CIA World Factbook demographic statistics.
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
Population:
827,900
Age structure:
"0-14 years:"
33% (male 141,779; female 136,212)
"15-64 years:"
63% (male 263,127; female 262,686)
"65 years and over:"
4% (male 13,405; female 15,285) (2000 est.)
Population growth rate:
1.40% (2006 est.)
Birth rate:
23.48 births/1,000 population (2000 est.)
Death rate:
5.78 deaths/1,000 population (2000 est.)
Net migration rate:
-3.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2000 est.)
Sex ratio:
"at birth:"
1.05 male(s)/female
"under 15 years:"
1.04 male(s)/female
"15-64 years:"
1 male(s)/female
"65 years and over:"
0.88 male(s)/female
"total population:"
1.01 male(s)/female (2000 est.)
Infant mortality rate:
14.45 deaths/1,000 live births (2000 estimate)
Life expectancy at birth:
"total population:"
67.94 years
"male:"
65.54 years
"female:"
70.45 years (2000 est.)
Total fertility rate:
2.89 children born/woman (2000 est.) 2.65 children born/woman (2010 est.)
Nationality:
"noun:"
Fijian(s)
"adjective:"
Fijian
Languages:
English, Fijian, Hindustani have official status under the 1997 Constitution and Malayalam.
Literacy:
"definition:"
age 15 and over can read and write
"total population:"
91.6%
"male:"
93.8%
"female:"
89.3% (1995 est.)

</doc>
<doc id="54575" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54575" title="Politics of Fiji">
Politics of Fiji

Politics of Fiji take place within the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic. Fiji has a multiparty system with the Prime Minister of Fiji as head of government. The executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji.
The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
Constitutional structure.
Executive branch.
Fiji's Head of State is the President. He is elected by Parliament of Fiji after nomination by the Prime Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, for a three-year term. Although his role is largely an honorary one, modelled after that of the British Monarchy, the President has certain "reserve powers" that may be used in the event of a national crisis. In practice, attempts by the President to assert the reserve powers have proved problematic. In 2000, in the midst of a civilian coup d'État against the elected government, President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara announced on 27 May that he was assuming executive authority, but was evidently forced to resign two days later by the military Commander, Commodore Frank Bainimarama.
The President is also the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces.
Actual executive power is in the hands of the cabinet, presided over by the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is elected by Parliament, under the 2013 Constitution of Fiji. Under the former constitution, which was abrogated at the behest of the Military-backed interim government in 2009, the Prime Minister was formally appointed by the President, but had to be acceptable to a majority of the House of Representatives. In practice, this usually reduced the President's role to little more than a formality, with the position automatically going to the leader of the political party or coalition that controlled a majority of seats.
There were times, however, when there was no clear majority in the House of Representatives. The parliamentary election of 1992 was inconclusive, and the position of the largest party, the Soqosoqo ni Vakavulewa ni Taukei, was further undermined by subsequent defections. On such occasions, the President had to take on the role of an arbitrator. After consulting with all the parliamentary factions, he would appoint as Prime Minister the person he judged to be the most acceptable to the majority in the House of Representatives. If no such person could be found, the President was required to order a new election.
Another situation requiring Presidential intervention arose following the 1999 election. The People's Coalition won a landslide victory; with the largest party in the coalition, the Fiji Labour Party, winning a majority in its own right. Some of the smaller parties in the coalition expressed unease at the prospect of Mahendra Chaudhry, the Labour Party leader and an Indo-Fijian, becoming Prime Minister, saying that he would be unacceptable to indigenous Fijian voters that they represented. President Mara, however, persuaded them to accept Chaudhry as Prime Minister.
The cabinet, consisting of around ten to twenty five Ministers, is formally appointed by the President on the nomination of the Prime Minister.
According to the former 1997 constitution, the cabinet was supposed to reflect the political composition of the House of Representatives, with every party holding more than 8 seats in the House entitled to proportionate representation in the cabinet. In practice, this rule was never strictly implemented. In 1999, Chaudhry refused to give Ministerial posts to the Soqosoqo ni Vakavulewa ni Taukei (SVT), saying that its demands were unacceptable. From 2001 to 2004, Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase, whose coalition dominated by his Soqosoqo Duavata ni Lewenivanua had narrowly won the 2001 election, refused to include the Fiji Labour Party in his cabinet, and avoided implementing several subsequent Supreme Court verdicts ordering him to do so by appealing each successive verdict, until the Labour Party announced late in 2004 that it was no longer interested in joining the cabinet. Under the 2013 Constitution, the Cabinet is no longer required to reflect the political composition of Parliament.
Legislative branch.
Under the 2013 Constitution, Fiji's Parliament is unicameral. Its 50 members are elected for four-year terms by Party-list proportional representation, with the entire country voting as a single constituency. To win election to Parliament, a political party (or an independent candidate) must win five percent of the total valid vote nationwide. Fiji's system differs from that of many other countries using the party-list system, however, in that voters do not vote for a party, as such, but for an individual candidate. Each voter is allowed to vote for only one candidate. The votes for all candidates on a party ticket are pooled, their aggregate as a percentage of the total valid vote (minus votes cast for parties falling short of the five-percent threshold) determining the number of seats in Parliament to which their party is entitled. The eligible number of candidates from a political party are elected in the order of the number of votes they received individually. In the 2014 elections, for example, the FijiFirst Party polled 59.2 percent of the valid vote. When votes for small parties polling less than the five-percent threshold were excluded, this entitled FijiFirst to 32 of the 50 seats. These were filled by the 32 FijiFirst candidates who polled the highest number of votes as individuals.
Prior to the adoption of the 2013 Constitution, Fiji's Parliament consisted of two houses. The more powerful of the two chambers, the House of Representatives, had 71 members, elected for five-year terms. 25 were elected by universal suffrage. The remaining 46 were reserved for Fiji's ethnic communities and were elected from communal electoral rolls: 23 Fijians, 19 Indo-Fijians, 1 Rotuman, and 3 "general electors" (Europeans, Chinese, and other minorities). The House chose a Speaker, who was not allowed to be a present member of the House.
The "upper chamber", the Senate, was primarily a house of review: it could not initiate legislation, but could amend or reject it. The 32 senators were formally appointed by the President on the nomination of the Great Council of Chiefs (14), the Prime Minister (9), the Leader of the Opposition (8), and the Council of Rotuma (1). Senators as well as Representatives could serve as cabinet Ministers.
When the Parliament was bicameral, the attorney-general, Fiji's top legal official who sits in the cabinet, was the only member of Parliament permitted to attend sessions of both chambers. The attorney-general had voting rights only in the chamber to which he or she was elected or appointed, but was authorized to attend and participate in debates in the other chamber.
Judicial branch.
Fiji maintains an independent judiciary, with judicial power vested in three courts (the High Court, Court of Appeal, and Supreme Court) established by the Constitution, which also makes provision for other courts to be set up by Parliament; Magistrates' Courts have accordingly been set up. The High Court and the Supreme Court are both presided over by the Chief Justice (currently Anthony Gates); the Chief Justice is barred, however, from membership of the Court of Appeal, which comprises three judges. The Appeal Court, which did not exist prior to the 1997 Constitution, has the power ""to hear and determine appeals"" from judgements of the High Court; decisions of this court may be further appealed to the Supreme Court, whose decision is final. The judiciary managed to maintain its independence from political control in the aftermath of the coups of 1987. Following the 2000 coup, however, its integrity was compromised, in the eye of many, when three judges (including Daniel Fatiaki, who later became Chief Justice) advised then-President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara to abrogate the constitution. Mara refused and resigned; a military administration replaced him. Then Chief Justice recognized the military government, triggering widespread disappointment to those who had seen the judiciary as a model of independence. On 15 November 2000, however, the High Court forced the reinstatement of the 1997 Constitution, which had been abrogated in June following the forced resignation of President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara on 29 May.
Following the military coup of 2006, the Military dismissed Chief Justice Daniel Fatiaki and appointed the more pliable Anthony Gates in his place. Following a Court of Appeal decision in 2009 that the Military-backed interim government was illegal, President Ratu Josefa Iloilo abrogated the constitution, dismissed all judges, and reappointed the interim government. Some judges were subsequently reappointed and some were not.
Local government.
There are four administrative divisions (Central, Eastern, Northern and Western), each under the charge of a commissioner appointed by the central government. The divisions are further subdivided into fourteen provinces, each of which has a provincial council. In addition, the island of Rotuma has the status of a "dependency", and enjoys a degree of internal autonomy, with its own island council.
Ethnic Fijians have their own administration in which councils preside over a hierarchy of provinces, districts, and villages. The councils deal with all matters affecting ethnic Fijians. The 55‑member Great Council of Chiefs "(Bose Levu Vakaturaga" in Fijian) included 3 representatives from each of Fiji's 14 provinces and 1 dependency, 3 ex-officio members (the President, Vice-President, and Prime Minister), and 6 government appointees; former Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka was a life-member. The Great Council of Chiefs advised the government, and also functioned as an electoral college to appoint the President of the Republic, as well as 14 of the 32 Senators. This prerogative of the Council was delegated to the 14 provincial councils, each choosing one senator. It was a constitutional oddity that even though Fiji became a Republic in 1987, Queen Elizabeth II was by the Great Council of Chiefs as the Tui Viti, the Paramount Chief, until 2012, when the council was disestablished.
Suva, Lautoka, and nine other towns have municipal governments, with city or town councils, each chaired by a mayor. These are responsible for the local affairs of all citizens, and are elected by universal suffrage.
Political conditions.
In April 1970, a constitutional conference in London agreed that Fiji should become a fully sovereign and independent nation within the Commonwealth of Nations. Fiji became independent on 10 October of that year.
Post-independence politics came to be dominated by Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara and the Alliance Party, which commanded the support of the traditional Fijian chiefs, along with leading elements of the European and part-European communities, and some Indo-Fijians. The main parliamentary opposition, the National Federation Party, represented mainly rural Indo-Fijians. Intercommunal relations were managed without serious confrontation. A short-lived constitutional crisis developed after the parliamentary election of March 1977, when the Indian-led National Federation Party (NFP) won a narrow majority of seats in the House of Representatives, but failed to form a government due to internal leadership problems, as well as concerns among some of its members that indigenous Fijians would not accept Indo-Fijian leadership. The NFP splintered in a leadership brawl three days after the election; in a controversial move, the governor-general, Ratu Sir George Cakobau, called on the defeated Mara to form an interim government, pending a second election to resolve the impasse. This was held in September that year, and saw Mara's Alliance Party returned with a record majority of 36 parliamentary seats out of 52. The majority of the Alliance Party was reduced in the election of 1982, but with 28 seats out of 52, Mara retained power. Mara proposed a "government of national unity" — a grand coalition between his Alliance Party and the NFP, but the NFP leader, Jai Ram Reddy, rejected this.
The two coups of 1987.
In April 1987, a coalition led by Dr Timoci Bavadra, an ethnic Fijian who was nevertheless supported mostly by the Indo-Fijian community, won the general election and formed Fiji's first majority Indian government, with Dr Bavadra serving as Prime Minister. After less than a month in office, Dr Bavadra was forcibly removed from power during a military coup led by Lt. Col. Sitiveni Rabuka on 14 May 1987. Rabuka had served with the United Nations peacekeeping forces in Lebanon.
After a period of continued jockeying and negotiation, Rabuka staged a second coup on 25 September 1987. The military government revoked the constitution and declared Fiji a republic on 10 October, the seventeenth anniversary of Fiji's independence from the United Kingdom. This action, coupled with protests by the government of India, led to Fiji's expulsion from the Commonwealth and official nonrecognition of the Rabuka regime by foreign governments, including Australia and New Zealand. On 6 December, Rabuka resigned as Head of State, and the former governor-general, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, was appointed the first President of the Fijian Republic. Mara was reappointed Prime Minister, and Rabuka became Minister of home affairs.
The Republic.
The new government drafted a new constitution that went into force in July 1990. Under its terms, majorities were reserved for ethnic Fijians in both houses of the legislature. Previously, in 1989, the government had released statistical information showing that for the first time since 1946, ethnic Fijians were a majority of the population. More than 12,000 Indo-Fijians and other minorities had left the country in the two years following the 1987 coups. After resigning from the military, Rabuka became Prime Minister under the new constitution in 1992.
Ethnic tensions simmered in 1995-1996 over the renewal of Indo-Fijian land leases and political maneuvering surrounding the mandated 7‑year review of the 1990 constitution. The Constitutional Review Commission produced a draft constitution which slightly expanded the size of the legislature, lowered the proportion of seats reserved by ethnic group, reserved the presidency for ethnic Fijians but opened the position of Prime Minister to all races. Prime Minister Rabuka and President Mara supported the proposal, while the nationalist indigenous Fijian parties opposed it. The reformed constitution was approved in July 1997. Fiji was readmitted to the Commonwealth in October.
The first legislative elections held under the new constitution took place in May 1999. Rabuka's coalition was defeated by an alliance of Indo-Fijian parties led by Mahendra Chaudhry, who became Fiji's first Indo-Fijian Prime Minister.
The coup of 2000.
Chaudhry's government was short-lived. After barely a year in office, Chaudhry and most other members of parliament were taken hostage in the House of Representatives by gunmen led by ethnic Fijian nationalist George Speight, on 19 May 2000. The standoff dragged on for 8 weeks — during which time Chaudhry was removed from office by the then-President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara because of his inability to govern — before the Fijian military seized power and brokered a negotiated end to the situation, then arrested Speight when he violated its terms. Former banker Laisenia Qarase was named interim Prime Minister and head of the interim civilian government by the military and the Great Council of Chiefs in July. A court order restored the constitution early in 2001, and a subsequent election confirmed Qarase as Prime Minister.
The coup of 2006.
Disgruntled by two bills before the Fijian Parliament, one offering amnesty for the leaders of the 2000 coup, the military leader Commodore Frank Bainimarama asked Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase to resign in mid‑October, 2006. The Prime Minister attempted to sack Bainimarama without success. Australian and New Zealand governments expressed concerns about a possible coup.
On 4 November 2006, Qarase dropped the controversial amnesty measures from the bill. 
On 29 November New Zealand foreign Minister Winston Peters organised talks in Wellington between Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase and Commodore Bainimarama. Peters reported the talks as "positive" but after returning to Fiji Commodore Bainimarama announced that the military were to take over most of Suva and fire into the harbour "in anticipation of any foreign intervention". [http://www.stuff.co.nz/stuff/0,2106,3882815a10,00.html]
Bainimarama announced on 3 December 2006 that he had taken control of Fiji. 
Bainimarama restored the presidency to Ratu Josefa Iloilo on 4 January 2007, and in turn was formally appointed interim Prime Minister by Iloilo the next day.
2009 constitutional crisis.
On April 10, 2009, Fijian President Ratu Josefa Iloilo announced on a nationwide radio broadcast that he had abrogated the Constitution of Fiji, dismissed the Court of Appeal and all other branches of the Judiciary, and assumed all governance in the country after the court ruled that the current government was illegal. The next day, he reinstated Bainimarama, who announced that there would be no elections until 2014.
New constitution (2013) and election (2014).
A new Constitution was promulgated by the regime in September 2013, and a general election was held in September 2014. It was won by Bainimarama's FijiFirst Party.
Contentious issues.
Most of Fiji's political controversies are related to the ethnic fault line that characterizes Fijian politics. Fiji is one of the rare countries in the world that officially imposes disabilities on a group that constitutes a large part of the population on the pretended basis of race. It has caused an exodus of the Indians, who until recently formed a slight majority in Fiji.
Land tenure.
One of the main issues that has fuelled the contention over the years is land tenure. Indigenous Fijian communities very closely identify themselves with their land. In 1909 near the peak of the inflow of indentured Indian laborers, the land ownership pattern was frozen and further sales prohibited. Today over 80% of the land is held by indigenous Fijians, under the collective ownership of the traditional Fijian clans. Indo-Fijians produce over 90% of the sugar crop but must lease the land they work from its ethnic Fijian owners instead of being able to buy it outright. The leases have been generally for 10 years, although they are usually renewed for two 10‑year extensions. Many Indo-Fijians argue that these terms do not provide them with adequate security and have pressed for renewable 30‑year leases, while many ethnic Fijians fear that an Indo-Fijian government would erode their control over the land.
The Indo-Fijian parties' major voting bloc is made up of sugarcane farmers. The farmers' main tool of influence has been their ability to galvanize widespread boycotts of the sugar industry, thereby crippling the economy.
Citizenship and residency issues.
Multiple citizenship, previously prohibited under the 1997 constitution (abrogated April 2009), has been permitted since the April 2009 Citizenship Decree and established as a right under Section 5(4) of the September 2013 Constitution.
International organization participation.
ACP, AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G‑77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, OPCW, PCA, PIF, Sparteca, SPC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.
The Consumer Council of Fiji.
The Consumer Council of Fiji is a statutory organisation that looks after consumer interest in Fiji.
Establishment.
The Consumer Council of Fiji is a statutory body established under the Consumer Council of Fiji Act 1976 (Cap 235). The council is governed by a board of directors appointed by the Minister of trade & industry. The board headed by a chairman appoints the chief executive officer, who runs the operations of the organisation.
The Council's head office is located on 4 Carnavon Street, in the Fijian capital of Suva. It has two other offices, one located in Lautoka (Fiji's second city) that serves the western division and the other in Labasa that serves the northern division. The Council has four core divisions: Campaigns, Information and Media Division; Alternative Dispute Resolution and Consumer Advisory Division; Research and Policy Analysis; and Administration, Human Resource & Project Management Division.

</doc>
<doc id="54577" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54577" title="Economy of Fiji">
Economy of Fiji

Endowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, Fiji is one of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though it remains a developing country with a large subsistence agriculture sector. Agriculture accounts for 18% of gross domestic product, although it employed some 70% of the workforce as of 2001. Sugar exports and the growing tourist industry are the major sources of foreign exchange. Sugar cane processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Coconuts, ginger, and copra are also significant.
Fiji Village quoted Energy Minister Lekh Ram Vayeshnoi on 22 September 2006, who confirmed that the Southern Cross Management Company Limited had applied for a license to drill for petroleum in Fiji's waters. The application was later revoked after exploratory reports indicated that Fijian oil reserves were severely overstated. Accepted estimates now range between 500 - 600 million barrels of Brent crude oil, with a total market value of approximately $4.7 billion over 20 years.
Fiji has a population of 905,949 people. The country's tallest building is the 14-story Reserve Bank of Fiji Building in Suva. Fiji is a member of the WTO.
Development plan.
In September 2002, the government announced a 20-year development plan. Among other things, it aimed to give indigenous Fijians a greater stake in the economy. The plan envisages tax-relief to businesses owned or managed by ethnic Fijians, along with greater protection for indigenous land and fishery rights.
A major aim of the Fijian government is to achieve self-sufficiency in rice production. Cattle farming, fishing, and forestry (especially pine trees) are being encouraged to diversify the economy; the leading manufacturing industries involve the processing of primary products. On 14 April 2005, the Cabinet approved Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's proposal to develop a biofuels industry. Under the plan, ethanol is to be developed as a complement to the sugar industry, with the hope of alleviating Fiji's dependence on imported fossil fuel such as petrol.
On 15 August, Qarase said that the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) had granted assistance to Fiji to develop its biofuels project. Transformation of the Fiji Sugar Corporation into an energy and sugar company would result in a turnover of F$1 billion by 2025, he said, and would cut imports of crude oil, generate export earnings, and provide a source of electricity. Energy could be produced from copra, forest, and agricultural products, as well as sugar. He touted the scheme as necessary for diversifying and strengthening the sugar industry for its own survival, as well as for the national economy. He said that the government of India had loaned F$86 million for upgrading of Fiji's sugar mills, which would be completed in time for the 2007-2008 crushing season.
On 28 December 2005, John Teiwa of the Coconut Industry Development Authority announced that a 20-year plan for the coconut industry would be launched in 2006. Financing from international investors, including the government of India, would be sought to develop processing of virgin and extra virgin coconut oil, with a view to venturing into foreign health markets. The government expected an annual profit of F$120 million from the venture, Fiji Village reported. Trials for the generation of fuel from coconut oil were also in progress, Teiwa said.
Tourism.
Tourism is the best and has expanded rapidly since the early 1980s and is the leading economic activity in the islands. More than 409,000 people visited Fiji in 1999, excluding cruise ship passengers. About one-quarter came from Australia, with large contingents also coming from New Zealand, Japan, the United States and United Kingdom. Over 62,000 of the tourists were American, a number that had steadily increased since the start of regularly scheduled non-stop air service from Los Angeles. Tourism earned more than $300 million in foreign exchange for Fiji in 1998, an amount exceeding the revenue from its two largest goods exports (sugar and garments).
The effects of the Asian financial crisis led to a sharp drop in the number of Asian tourists visiting Fiji in 1997 and 1998, which contributed to a substantial drop in gross domestic product. Positive growth returned in 1999, however, aided by a 20% devaluation of the Fijian dollar. 2005 was a record year for the tourism sector, with 9% growth according to Viliame Gavoka, Chief Executive of the Fiji Visitors Bureau
Trade.
Fiji runs a persistently large trade deficit. Imports in 1998 accounted for US$721 million, and exports for US$510 million, resulting in a US$116 million deficit. Tourism revenue yields services surplus, however, which keeps the current account of its balance of payments roughly in balance ($13 million in 1998). Australia accounts for between 35% and 45% of Fiji's trade, with New Zealand, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan varying year-by-year between 5% and 15% each.
Foodstuffs, machinery, mineral fuels, beverages, tobacco, and manufactured goods are the principal imports. The two largest exports are sugar and garments, which each accounted for approximately one-quarter of export revenue in 1998 (roughly $122 million each). The sugar industry suffered in 1997 due to low world prices and rent disputes between farmers and landowners, and again in 1998 from drought, but recovered in 1999.
The Fijian garment industry has developed rapidly since the introduction of tax exemptions in 1988. The industry's output has increased nearly tenfold since that time. Fish, lumber, molasses, coconut oil and ginger are also important exports, although the last two are in decline. Forestry became important as an export trade in the mid-1980s, when the pine plantations planted in the 1950s and 1960s began to mature. They sell lots of fish.
Australia's Trade Commissioner Ross Bray revealed on 26 January 2006 that Fiji's exports to Australia are achieving an annual growth rate of 5%. More than 31,000 Australian companies were trading in the Pacific, half of them in Fiji, Bray said. Fiji is progressing very rapidly.
Investment.
The government's policy of awarding tax concessions to large multinational companies investing in Fiji has not proved universally popular. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has criticized it, saying that the concessions have been abused and have not generated long-term investment. An ADB report in 2005 accused foreign entrepreneurs of leaving as soon as their concessions expired, and alleged that administration of the concessions encouraged corruption and bribery.
The leader of the Fiji Labour Party Mahendra Chaudhry echoed the view of the ADB on 31 December 2005, saying that foreign companies repatriated much of the profit made in Fiji, rather than investing it locally, while taking advantage of the infrastructure funded by Fijian taxpayers without paying any taxes themselves. Such policy discriminated against local businesses, he claimed.
Economic problems.
Fiji's economic difficulties have been compounded by the effects of three coups over the last two decades.
Emigration.
Since 1987, when the country was destabilized by two military coups, Fiji has suffered a very high rate of emigration, particularly of skilled and professional personnel. More than 70,000 people left the country in the aftermath of the coups, some 90% of whom were Indo-Fijians. With the continuing expiration of land leases and ongoing instability in the aftermath of another coup in 2000, a further outflow of skilled workers has taken place.
A report in 2004 of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, published on 29 June 2005, found that 61% of Fiji's skilled workers have either emigrated or gone abroad as guestworkers. Fiji's loss of skilled workers was the world's fourth highest, behind Guyana, Jamaica, Haiti, and Trinidad and Tobago. Fiji's Bureau of Statistics recorded 3595 workers as having left the country between January and August 2004. Of these, 414 held professional or technical jobs, 263 were in administrative or managerial positions, and were clerks, supervisors, or related workers, and 118 were sales workers. Indo-Fijians comprised more than 90% of those leaving.
Fiji's economy is increasingly reliant on remittances from citizens working overseas. Personal remittances now run to more than F$200 million a year, earning more than traditional sectors like sugar and garment manufacturing. Recruitment of Fijians by foreign private military companies is a growing source of revenue. By mid-2005, there were over 1,000 Fijians working in Iraq and Kuwait as soldiers, security guards, drivers and labourers. In addition in 2006 there were more than 2,000 Fijian soldiers in the British Army, and in 2004 the British defence ministry even sent recruiting teams to Fiji to do initial fitness and aptitude tests, cutting the costs of selection for poor Fijian villagers who could not afford to fly to London to sign up.
Property laws and investment problems.
Low investment has been a long term problem in Fiji and property rights are sometimes thought to be part of this problem because, by law, five sixths of the land is owned communally by indigenous Fijians and may only be leased, not purchased outright. However, the leasehold system is often misunderstood.
Leasehold tenure has not been a problem for the property sector. Houses all over Fiji on communally owned land are on 99-year leases, which have proved satisfactory as a basis for house ownership. Hotels also enjoy 99-year leases. The prestigious Denarau development involving major hotels and resorts and luxury properties is situated on communally owned land. It delivers significant income to native owners and secure title to developers and their customers.
In agricultural sector, there have been problems, even though agricultural leases are mandated at 30 years, following the extension by legislation (the Agricultural Landlord and Tenant Act or ALTA) of all ten-year leases to thirty year in 1977. The problem experienced in agriculture is the non-renewal leases as landowners have been unhappy with the provisions in the ALTA for indexing of rents to cope with inflation. This is an ongoing problem which calls for urgent attention.
Natural disasters.
Drought in 1998 further damaged the sugar industry, but its recovery in 1999 contributed to robust GDP growth. Further damage to the economy (estimated at US$30 million) was wrought by a cyclone that hit the northern island of Vanua Levu in January 2003. Apart from the economic devastation, there were food shortages and outbreaks of disease due to the pollution of the water supply.
Tourism woes.
The aftermath of the political turmoil in 2000 resulted in a 10-percent shrinkage in the economy, as investor confidence plummeted and tourist numbers dropped sharply. An estimated 7500 jobs were lost. There has been a gradual recovery since 2001, when the was restored and free elections held. The possibility of a return to a racially discriminatory constitution led to fears that Fiji might forfeit its preferential arrangements with the European Union for its sugar exports, and with Australia for its clothing industry, but those fears have largely (but not entirely) subsided.
Homelessness.
In June 2003, a survey revealed a disturbingly high percentage of squatters - about one in ten Fijian citizens. 82,350 individuals in 13,725 households were estimated to live in 182 squatter settlements, with Suva and Nausori being the worst-affected areas. The number of squatter settlements had increased 14% since January 2001, and 73% since 1996. Urban migration, unemployment, the expiry of land leases, and the breakdown of nuclear and extended families were among the factors blamed for the trend. The report projected the population of squatters to grow to 90,000 in the Suva-Nausori corridor by 2006, putting increasing strain on supplies of water, electricity, sewage, and road services. On 14 September, Prime Minister Qarase said that the squatter problem had become so serious that the government was looking abroad for funding.
Human Development Index.
On 11 September 2005, the publication of the United Nations Human Development Index downgraded Fiji from 81st in 2004 to 92nd in 2005, behind Pacific neighbours Tonga and Samoa. Incomes had improved, the report said, with gross domestic product rising from F$5440 to F$5880, but other aspects of the quality of life enjoyed by Fiji Islanders had deteriorated. Life expectancy had declined from 72.9 in 2000 to 69.6 in 2004 and 67.8 in 2005, while literacy remained unchanged at 93%.
Joji Kotobalavu, the chief executive of the Prime Minister's Office, branded the report "a joke." His dismissal drew strong reaction from Opposition Leader Mahendra Chaudhry, who said that whereas Kotobalavu was paid to be the Prime Minister's spin doctor, the HDI report was put together by professionals who had no hidden agendas, and should therefore be taken very seriously.
Economic statistics.
Income.
Gross national product (GNP): US$101.48 billion; US$1820 per capita (2000)
Gross domestic product (GDP): US$1.64 billion; US$2031 per capita (2000)
GDP – real growth rate:
-6.6% (2008 est.)
GDP – composition by sector:
"agriculture:"
8.9%
"industry:"
13.5%
"services:"
77.6% (2006 est.) 
Population below poverty line:
25.5% 
Household income or consumption by percentage share:
"lowest 10%:"
NA%
"highest 10%:"
NA%
Inflation rate (consumer prices).
1.6% (2002 est.)
Workforce.
Labor force:
335,000
Labor force – by occupation:
subsistence agriculture 67%, wage earners 18%, salary earners 15% (1987)
Unemployment rate:
6% (1997 est.)
Budget.
"revenues:"
$540.65 million
"expenditures:"
$742.65 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1997 est.)
Industries.
tourism, sugar, clothing, copra, gold, silver, lumber, small cottage industries
Industrial production growth rate:
2.9% (1995)
Electricity.
Electricity – production:
550 GWh (1998)
Electricity – production by source:
"fossil fuel:"
20%
"hydro:"
80%
"nuclear:"
0%
"other:"
0% (1998)
Electricity – consumption:
512 GWh (1998)
Electricity – exports:
0 kWh (1998)
Electricity – imports:
0 kWh (1998)
Agriculture.
Agriculture – products:
sugar cane, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), rice, sweet potatoes, bananas, ginger, taro, kava; livestock: cattle, pigs, shrimp, pickles,goats; fish
Imports.
US$921 million (1998)
Imports – commodities:
machinery and transport equipment, petroleum products, food, chemicals
Imports – partners:
Australia 35%, Japan 4.8%, Singapore 19.2%, New Zealand 17.1% (2003).
Debt and aid.
Debt – external:
US$136 million (2000)
Economic aid – recipient:
$40.3 million (1995)
Currency.
1 Fijian dollar (F$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates:
Fijian dollars (F$) per US$1 – 1.83 (November 2013), 1.72565 (August 2006), 1.9654 (January 2000), 1.9696 (1999), 1.9868 (1998), 1.4437 (1997), 1.4033 (1996), 1.4063 (1995)

</doc>
<doc id="54578" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54578" title="RC Cola">
RC Cola

RC Cola, also known as Royal Crown Cola, is a cola-flavored soft drink developed in 1905 by Claud A. Hatcher, a pharmacist in Columbus, Georgia, United States.
History.
The first product in the Royal Crown line was Royal Crown Ginger Ale in 1905, followed by Royal Crown Strawberry, and Royal Crown Root Beer. The company was renamed Chero-Cola in 1910, and in 1925 renamed Nehi Corporation after its colored and flavored drinks. In 1934, Chero-Cola was reformulated by Rufus Kamm, a chemist, and re-released as Royal Crown Cola.
In the 1950s, Royal Crown Cola and moon pies were a popular "working man's lunch" in the American South. In 1954, Royal Crown was the first company to sell soft drinks in a can, and later the first company to sell a soft drink in an aluminum can.
In 1958, the company introduced the first diet cola, Diet Rite, and in 1980, a caffeine-free cola, RC 100. In the mid-1990s, RC released Royal Crown Draft Cola, billed as a "premium" cola using pure cane sugar as a sweetener, rather than high fructose corn syrup. Offered only in 12-ounce bottles, sales were disappointing, due largely to the inability of the RC bottling network to get distribution for the product in single-drink channels, and it was quickly discontinued with the exceptions of Australia, New Zealand and France. It is now available only in New Zealand, parts of Australia and Thailand and also Tajikistan. The company also released Cherry RC, a cherry-flavored version of the RC soft drink, to compete with Coca-Cola Cherry and Pepsi Wild Cherry.
In October 2000, Royal Crown was acquired by Cadbury Schweppes plc through its acquisition of Snapple. Royal Crown operations were subsequently folded into Dr Pepper/Seven Up, a former subsidiary of Cadbury Schweppes. In 2001, all international RC-branded businesses were sold to Cott Beverages of Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, and are operated as Royal Crown Cola International, which handles RC Cola products outside the United States. In the US, distribution is handled by Dr Pepper Snapple Group.
RC Cola was introduced to Latvia in June 2010, and the United Kingdom in May 2011, and sold at Asda supermarkets and other retailers. It is bottled in the country by Cott Beverages. It is available in Estonia where it is distributed by A. Le Coq. In Australia, it is marketed by Australian Pure Fruits.
RC Cola is bottled in Cyprus by Kean Soft Drinks Limited, and in the Philippines by ARC Bottlers. Jaz Cola, along with RC Cola was sold by the Cosmos Bottling in 1996 until 2001 when San Miguel Corporation acquired Cosmos and sold its brands to the Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines, Inc., but it terminates the license to produce RC Cola, along with Sunkist (soft drink) and Jolt Cola. However, former Cosmos advertising agents co-operating with the Zest-O chairman to reintroduce RC Cola and gain ownership to RC Cola International as Asiawide Refreshments. Today, RC Cola is the top-selling cola brand in the Philippines.
Advertising campaigns.
The RC Cola brand has been marketed through many campaigns. In the 1930s, Alex Osborn, with BBDO, made an ad campaign, including the following slogan: "The season's best."
The 1940s saw a magazine advertising campaign with actress Lizabeth Scott as the face, next to the slogan "RC tastes best, says Lizabeth Scott".
In 1966, Royal Crown Cola collaborated with Jim Henson on an ad campaign for Royal Crown Cola which featured two birds called Sour Bird (performed by Jim Henson) and Nutty Bird (performed by Jim Henson and assisted by Frank Oz) to promote the drinks. Nutty Bird would promote Royal Crown Cola by touting the benefits. The puppet for Nutty Bird was designed by Jim Henson and built by Don Sahlin. Sour Bird appeared on "The Ed Sullivan Show" with the Rock and Roll Monster.
Nancy Sinatra was featured in two Royal Crown Cola commercials in her one-hour special, "Movin' With Nancy" featuring various singers, David Winters choreography in December 1967. She sang, "It's a mad, mad, mad Cola... RC the one with the mad, mad taste!...RC!" The company was the official sponsor of New York Mets off and on at times during the 1960s, 70s and 80s. A television commercial in the New York area featured Tom Seaver, New York Mets pitcher, and his wife, Nancy, dancing on top of a dugout at Shea Stadium and singing the tune from the Sinatra campaign. In the mid 1970s, Royal Crown ran the "Me & My RC" advertisements. Others featured people in scenic outdoor locations. The jingle, sung by Louise Mandrell, went, "Me and my RC / Me and my RC /'Cause what's good enough / For other folks / Ain't good enough for me." RC was introduced to Israel in 1995 with the slogan "RC: Just like in America!" During the Cola Wars of the 1980s, RC used the 'Decide for yourself' campaign and would remind people 'There's more to your life than Coke and Pepsi." The Philippines released advertisements using rising stars.They also painted their "suki" stores with slogans like "RC ng (insert municipality/city)".
Andretti Autosport driver Marco Andretti had RC Cola as primary sponsor during the 2012 and 2013 IndyCar Series.

</doc>
<doc id="54581" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54581" title="Subway (restaurant)">
Subway (restaurant)

Subway (stylized as SUBWAY) is an American fast food restaurant franchise that primarily sells submarine sandwiches (subs) and salads. It is owned and operated by Doctor's Associates Inc. (trademarked as Subway IP Inc.) Subway is one of the fastest growing franchises in the world, with 44,672 restaurants in 111 countries and territories as of March 14, 2016. The United States alone has 27,058 outlets. It is the largest single-brand restaurant chain and the largest restaurant operator in the world.
Subway's international headquarters is in Milford, Connecticut; five regional centers support Subway's international operations. The regional offices for European franchises are located in Amsterdam, Netherlands; the Australian and New Zealand locations are supported from Brisbane, Australia; the Asian locations are supported from offices located in Beirut, Lebanon, and Singapore; and the Latin American support center is in Miami, Florida.
History.
Early history.
In 1965, Fred DeLuca borrowed $1,000 from friend Peter Buck to start "Pete's Super Submarines" in Bridgeport, Connecticut, and in the following year they formed Doctor's Associates Inc. to oversee operations of the restaurants as the franchise expanded. The holding company derives its name from DeLuca's goal to earn enough from the business to pay tuition for medical school, as well as Buck's having a doctorate in physics. Doctor's Associates is not affiliated with, nor endorsed by, any medical organization. In 1968, the sandwich shop was renamed "Subway".
The first Subway on the West Coast was opened in Fresno, California, in 1978. The first Subway outside of North America opened in Bahrain in December 1984. The first Subway in the United Kingdom was opened in Brighton in 1996. In 2004, Subway began opening stores in Walmart supercenters, and surpassed the number of McDonald's locations inside U.S. Walmart stores in 2007.
Since 2007, Subway has consistently ranked in "Entrepreneur" magazine's Top 500 Franchises list. It ranked #2 in 2012. It also ranked #2 on the "Fastest Growing Franchise" and "Global Franchise" lists. At the end of 2010, Subway became the largest fast food chain worldwide, with 33,749 restaurants – 1,012 more than McDonald's.
Products.
Subway's core product is the submarine sandwich (or "sub"). In addition to these, the chain also sells wraps, salad, and baked goods (including cookies, doughnuts, and muffins). While some menu items vary between countries and markets, Subway's worldwide signature sub varieties include:
Subway's best-selling sandwich, the B.M.T., contains pepperoni, salami, and ham. The name originally stood for Brooklyn Manhattan Transit, but now stands for "Bigger, Meatier, Tastier".
Subway also sells breakfast sandwiches, English muffins, and flatbread. In 2006, "personal pizzas" debuted in some US markets. These are made to order (like their subs) and heated for 85 seconds. Breakfast and pizza items are only available in some stores. In November 2009, Subway signed a deal to serve exclusively Seattle's Best Coffee coffee as part of their breakfast menu in the US.
A 2009 Zagat survey named Subway the best provider of "Healthy Options" (in the "Mega Chain" category). Subway was also first in "Top Service" and "Most Popular" rankings. It placed second in "Top Overall", behind Wendy's.
Regional variations.
Subway's menu varies between countries, most significantly where there are religious requirements relating to the meats served.
In 2006, the first kosher Subway restaurant in the United States opened, in a suburb of Cleveland, Ohio in the Mandel JCC of Cleveland. Former Subway spokesman Jared Fogle attended the opening. A press release stated, "With slight modifications, such as no pork-based products, and the use of soy-based cheese product, the menu is virtually identical to that of any other Subway restaurant." Other openings soon followed, briefly making Subway one of the largest U.S. kosher restaurant chains. At their peak, 12 kosher Subway locations were open in the U.S, including Kansas City and 5 in New York. As of 2011, only five remain: Cleveland, Miami, Los Angeles and two stores in Maryland. Franchisees who failed noted a lack of support from the parent location in advertising, higher costs of kosher food and supervision, the inability to remain open on Saturdays, and that customers who do not keep kosher prefer the original menu and prices.
Subway opened its first restaurant in India in 2001 in New Delhi. Subway restaurants in India do not serve beef and pork products in deference to Hindu and Muslim beliefs respectively, and sell an extended vegetarian range due to the large number of vegetarians in the country. There are 395 Subway restaurants in 68 cities of India as of January 2013. On September 4, 2012, Subway opened its first all-vegetarian outlet on the campus of Lovely Professional University (LPU) in Jalandhar, Punjab. On March 6, 2013, Subway opened its second all-vegetarian outlet also offering Jain food in Paldi, Ahmedabad.
Nutritional content.
In 2011, Subway introduced gluten-free bread and brownies to some locations in Texas. It also cut the salt content of its sandwiches by 15 percent.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, Subway has reduced salt content across its entire range by 33% and has committed to further reductions, in line with government targets. Subway's range of "Low Fat" subs is endorsed by the charity Heart Research UK.
Advertising.
Subway is the second-biggest fast food advertiser in the United States, behind only McDonald's. It spent US$516,000,000 on measurable advertising in 2012.
Subway uses the advertising slogan "Eat Fresh", and focuses on how their sandwiches are made from freshly baked bread and fresh ingredients, in front of customers to their exact specifications, by employees whom Subway calls "Subway Sandwich Artists".
In November 2007, Subway's US commercials featured the cartoon character Peter Griffin (from "Family Guy") promoting its new Subway Feast sandwich. Subway has also used "instant win" games, based on the game Scrabble.
Subway ran a product placement campaign in the US TV series "Chuck" since its first season. As ratings dwindled in the second season, a campaign to "save Chuck" was launched for fans, encouraging them to purchase a footlong sub from Subway on April 27, 2009, the date of the season finale. Tony Pace, Subway's marketing officer, called it the best product placement the restaurant chain has done "in several years."
To celebrate National Sandwich Day on November 3, 2015, Subway offered a Buy One sandwich, Give One sandwich free promotion.
Jared Fogle.
Jared Fogle was a national spokesman for the company in the US starting in January 2000, giving talks on healthy living and appearing in advertisements. Fogle first came to attention in his native Indiana by claiming that he lost over 200 pounds in part by eating at Subway. From 2008, he was featured less often as the company marketed with more emphasis on their "5 dollar footlong" campaign. Subway attributed between one third and one half of their growth from 1998 to 2011 to Fogle, the equivalent of a tripling in size. Subway cut ties with Fogle on August 18, 2015 amid expectations that he would plead guilty to child pornography and child molestation charges, which were confirmed the following day. He has since been sentenced to more than 15 years in federal prison.
In December 2015, following the removal of Fogle from its marketing, Subway introduced a new marketing campaign, "Founded on Fresh". The campaign focuses upon Subway's establishment and early history, and features Fred DeLuca, as played by his son, Jonathon. The new campaign downplays the use of jingles and celebrity endorsements (besides "targeted" sports marketing), in favor of focusing upon the qualities of its products, and specific products. Chief advertising officer Chris Carroll explained that the focus on fat, calories, and weight loss were "what fresh used to be", and that the new campaign would focus more on the sourcing of Subway's ingredients, such as its phase-out of antibiotic-treated meat. Carroll also explained that the new strategy was being developed prior to the controversy involving Fogle.
$5 footlongs.
In 2008, Subway began to offer all foot-long submarine sandwiches (excluding premium and double-meat varieties) for five dollars, in the continental United States and Canada, as a "limited time only" promotion. "Five Dollar Footlongs" quickly became the company's most successful promotion ever. Upon the initial promotion's completion, customer response prompted Subway to create a permanent "$5 Footlong Everyday Value Menu" that offered some footlong sandwiches for $5. As of 2011, there has been a monthly rotating $5 footlong. Which subs are permanently priced at $5 varies by market.
In October 2011, a similar promotion was launched in the United Kingdom. Customers can buy one of nine subs and any drink for £3 (for a six-inch sub) or £5 (for a footlong). On November 1, 2014, Subway discontinued the five dollar footlong promotion, replacing it with the $6 six-inch select with a drink and a choice of cookies or chips.
Sub Club.
In early June 2005, Subway announced its first customer reward program would be phased out due to counterfeiting. The "Sub Club" program was discontinued in September 2013 by Doctor's Associates.
Participating Subway restaurants in the U.S. and Canada offer a "Subway Card" to customers, which functions as a stored-value cash card. In some states and provinces, the card also functions as a "Subway Rewards Card", allowing customers to earn points for free food and sandwiches. Unlike in the "Sub Club" program, no other purchase is needed when redeeming points, and registered cards can be replaced if lost or stolen. Subway runs periodic promotions in which it gives away free subs to customers who pre-load a Subway Card with certain dollar amounts, usually listed at mysubwaycard.com.
All stores in the United Kingdom and Ireland participate in the Subcard system, offering customers points with each purchase at a store, which are redeemable for subs and snacks. Unlike in the US system, these cards cannot be used to store cash. The program was rolled out in Germany, and other parts of Europe from 2012.
Controversies.
Hepatitis A contamination.
In September 1999, at least 32 customers in the north Seattle area contracted hepatitis A after eating food contaminated with the virus at two Subway outlets. The virus, which is spread by eating or drinking food or water contaminated with infected feces, infects the liver causing nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue and fever. Subsequent investigations found that staff failed to adhere to thorough hand washing and the use of plastic gloves during food preparation. A class-action lawsuit on behalf of 31 victims was resolved for $1.6 million. The most seriously affected victim—a 6-year-old boy—suffered acute liver failure and required a liver transplant. He was awarded $10 million in an out-of-court settlement in 2001. A previous outbreak of hepatitis A in 1996 had also involved a Subway outlet in the Seattle area, although no legal action had resulted.
In April 2015, the Arkansas Department of Health issued a warning to the public that customers who had eaten at the Subway outlet in Morrilton, Arkansas, may have been exposed to infection after an employee tested positive for the virus.
Sandwich size.
On February 2, 2007, KNXV-TV (with the help of the Arizona Department of Weights and Measures) reported that three of Subway's "Giant Sub" sandwiches, nominally each long, were actually , , and long. The maximum variance in length allowed in Arizona is 3% (, for a three-foot sub). The report also showed the boxes designed to store these sandwiches were in length; shorter than the maximum allowable variance. In response to the report, Subway stated they were reevaluating their advertising, training and packaging materials with regard to the specific or implied length of Giant Subs, and were advising their franchisees to only discuss with customers the approximate number of expected servings and not a specific length of measurement.
In January 2013, an Australian teen, Matt Corby, complained on Facebook that Subway's "footlong" sandwich was only long, rather than . Subway responded by saying, "With regards to the size of the bread and calling it a footlong, 'Subway Footlong' is a registered trademark as a descriptive name for the sub sold in Subway Restaurants and not intended to be a measurement of length." In most metricated countries such as Australia, the foot is no longer a government recognized unit of measurement. The story was picked up by the "New York Post" who found similar cases in their investigation. Two New Jersey men are suing the company. A man from Chicago has also filed a suit. Both suits were filed on January 22, 2013. Another New Jersey man filed a federal class action lawsuit with the same allegations in 2013.
Franchise relations.
In 1995, Subway Sandwich Shops, Fred DeLuca, Peter Buck, and Doctor's Associates Inc. were held liable for breach of contract. An Illinois jury awarded more than $10 million in damages to Nicholas and Victoria Jannotta after finding lease and contract violations. The plaintiffs claimed the defendants had misrepresented the asset value of Subway Sandwich Shops (a leasing company used by Doctor's Associates for franchising purposes) while negotiating a 1985 lease agreement.
The U.S. House of Representatives' small business committee studied the franchise industry from 1992 to 1998. Dean Sagar noted, "Subway is the biggest problem in franchising and emerges as one of the key examples of every abuse you can think of." In 1989, the U.S. Small Business Administration refused small business loans to Subway franchise owners until Subway removed a contract clause which gave it power to seize and purchase any franchise without cause. "The Dallas Morning News" reported Subway had seized American soldier Leon Batie Jr.'s Subway stores in 2006, while he was serving in Afghanistan. He had been deployed to support Operation Enduring Freedom in March 2005, three years after buying his first restaurant. Batie alleged Subway had violated the U.S. Servicemembers Civil Relief Act. He filed a federal lawsuit against Subway, which was dismissed. He then filed suit in state court, in Dallas County, Texas. Both parties settled on "mutually agreeable" and confidential terms in January 2010.
United Kingdom VAT treatment.
In October 2010, Subway franchisees in the United Kingdom lost a high court appeal, against paying standard VAT on all toasted subs, as required by HM Revenue and Customs. Thus, in the United Kingdom, a toasted sub attracts VAT, whereas a cold sub, eaten off the premises, does not. Competitors such as Quiznos & McDonald's do not pay VAT on similar food.
In March 2012, Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne announced plans to close the loophole that allows Subway competitors to offer hot food without paying VAT. This legislation was expected to come into force from October 2012 onward, but the government withdrew plans to charge VAT on originally hot food being allowed to cool naturally on 28 May 2012. In June 2012, Subway launched the "Toast the Tax" campaign to put pressure on the government to drop VAT on toasted sandwiches, as it has done for hot savouries.
Casey's trademark case against Subway.
On January 31, 2011, Subway lawyer, Valerie Pochron, wrote to Casey's General Stores, a chain of Iowa-based convenience stores, demanding the small chain to cease using the term "footlong" in advertisements for its 12-inch sandwiches. Subway threatened to sue. Consequently, in February 2011, Casey's General Stores Inc. filed a petition in a U.S. District Court in Des Moines, seeking a legal declaration that the word "footlong" does not violate Subway's rights. Casey's further sought a declaration that the word "footlong' is a generic description of a sandwich measuring one foot. Before serving its complaint on Subway, Casey's voluntarily dismissed its action, ending the litigation.
Subway's trademark application for "footlong" has yet to be approved by the federal government. Subway has attempted to register it with the United States Patent and Trademark Office twice. They filed on November 8, 2007 and June 4, 2009. A&W, Pizza Hut, KFC, Taco Bell (all of which are Yum Brands restaurants), Long John Silver's and other restaurants are opposing that application.
Ingredients.
Subway made alterations to its bread after food blogger and activist Vani Hari gathered more than 50,000 signatures in a petition drive. Subway removed azodicarbonamide from its bread. Before Vani Hari's petition, Subway had used azodicarbonamide as a bread conditioner, to whiten the dough and allow sandwich bread to bake more quickly.
In August 2015, Vani Hari again petitioned Subway in conjunction with Natural Resources Defense Council, Friends of the Earth, the Center for Food Safety, U.S. Public Interest Research Group to commit to buying meat produced without the routine use of antibiotics and to provide a timeline for doing so. In October 2015, Subway announced they would transition to chicken raised without antibiotics in 2016 and turkey within the following 2–3 years, and would also transition beef and pork raised without antibiotics by 2025.

</doc>
<doc id="54582" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54582" title="Amung people">
Amung people

The Amung (also known as Amungme, Amuy, Damal or Uhunduni) people are a group of about 17,700 people living in the highlands of the Papua province of Indonesia. Their language is called Damal.
The traditional beliefs of the Amungme people are animistic. The Amungme people did not have the idea of "gods" that are separate from nature where spirits and nature are one and the same.
They practice shifting agriculture, supplementing their livelihood by hunting and gathering. The Amungme are very tied to their ancestral land and consider the surrounding mountains to be sacred.
This has led to friction with the Indonesian government, which is eager to exploit the vast mineral deposits contained there. Major changes in the Amungme of the highlands and Kamoro of the lowlands lifestyle have been brought about by the Grasberg mine, situated in the heart of Amungme territory and owned by Freeport-McMoRan, the region's largest single employer. Extensive gold and copper mining have altered the landscape, and the presence of the mine and its infrastructure has attracted numerous other economic migrants from western Indonesia as well as other Papuans, some of whom have tried to settle on traditional Amungme lands. This has caused land dispute regarding customary land rights between the Amungme people against Freeport Indonesia mining company in Timika. In the last 35 years, the Amungme have seen their sacred mountain destroyed by the mine, and watched as their relatives are killed by Indonesian soldiers "defending" it, while the Kamoro have more than 200,000 tons of waste pumped into their rivers each day. All these factors have created complex social and political stresses, and led to somewhat frequent protests and/or social conflicts, some of which have been violently suppressed by the Indonesian police or military.

</doc>
<doc id="54583" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54583" title="Enxet people">
Enxet people

The Enxet are an indigenous people of about 17,000 living in the Gran Chaco region of western Paraguay. Originally hunter-gatherers, many are now forced to supplement their livelihood as laborers on the cattle ranches that have encroached upon their dwindling natural forest habitat. Nevertheless, the Enxet are still engaged in an ongoing conflict with the government and ranchers, who want to destroy what remains of the forest to open the land for massive settlement. Today, only a handful of Enxet are still able to maintain their traditional way of life, while the majority live in small settlements sponsored by various missionary organizations. The Enxet language is still vigorous.

</doc>
<doc id="54586" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54586" title="Quantum Leap">
Quantum Leap

Quantum Leap is an American science fiction television series that originally aired on NBC for five seasons, from March 1989 through May 1993. Created by Donald P. Bellisario, it starred Scott Bakula as Dr. Sam Beckett, a physicist who leaps through spacetime during an experiment in time travel, by temporarily taking the place of other people in order to correct historical mistakes. Dean Stockwell co-stars as Admiral Al Calavicci, Sam's womanizing, cigar-smoking companion and best friend, who appears to him as a hologram.
The series features a mix of humor, drama, romance, social commentary, and science fiction, and was named one of "TV Guide"'s "Top Cult Shows Ever."
Premise.
"Quantum Leap" follows the narrative of Dr. Sam Beckett (Scott Bakula), a brilliant scientist that has become stuck in his past as a result of a time travel experiment gone wrong, and his attempts to return to his present, the late 20th century, by altering events in the past for the better, with the aid of a hologram of his friend Admiral Al Calavicci (Dean Stockwell), monitoring him from Sam's present.
In the series premiere, Sam has theorized the ability to travel in one's own lifetime and is the lead of the government-funded Project Quantum Leap, operating from a secret laboratory in New Mexico; Al oversees the project for the government. When Al learns that funding for the project is in danger of being pulled because no demonstrable results have come from the project, Sam takes it upon himself to step into the Quantum Leap Accelerator to prove the project works and is sent into the past. When Sam gains consciousnesses, he finds himself suffering from partial amnesia, and more surprised to find that his appearance to others, including what he sees in the mirror, is not his own face. He finds that Al has come to his aid as a hologram that only Sam can see and hear, as it is tuned to his brainwaves. Al, working with the Project's artificial intelligence Ziggy (voiced by Deborah Pratt), determines that Sam must alter an event in the current period he is in so as to re-engage the Quantum Leap process and return home. Al helps Sam overcome some facets of his "swiss-cheese memory" and provides information on history as it originally happened, and Sam is able to successfully change history. Sam leaps out, only to find himself in the life of someone else in a different period of time.
Episodes in the series subsequently follow Sam's reaction to each leap (typically ending the cold open with him uttering "Oh, boy!" on discovering his situation), and then working with Al and Ziggy to figure out his new identity and whom he needs to help in order to "set right what once went wrong" and trigger the next leap. An episode typically ends showing the first few moments of Sam's next leap, which is repeated in the following episode's cold open. Though initially Sam's leaping is believed by Al and the others on the Quantum Leap team to be random, the characters come to believe in later seasons that someone or something is controlling Sam's leaping, and this is a central focus of the show's finale episode, "Mirror Image".
When Sam leaps, his body is physically present in the past, although he appears to others as the person he leaped into. In one case, after leaping into a Vietnam veteran that had lost both legs, Sam could still walk normally but appeared to others as if he was floating. Sam's body and mind may become jumbled with those he has leaped into. In one situation, he leaped into a women near the end of her pregnancy and felt her birth pains, while in another episode he leaped into the body of Lee Harvey Oswald and felt intense pressure to assassinate John F. Kennedy, despite knowing it was the wrong thing to do. Similarly, the person that Sam has leaped into is brought into the future, where they appear as Sam to the others; they are normally kept in an isolated waiting room to prevent them from learning anything about the future, and they return to their own time when Sam leaps.
In most of Sam's leaps, the changes he makes are small on the grand scale, such as saving the life of a person who might otherwise have died, or helping making someone's life better. Selected episodes have shown more dramatic effects of his time travels. In one episode, Sam's actions ultimately lead to Al's death prior to the Project, and Sam finds himself suddenly aided by a new hologram, "Edward St. John V" (played by Roddy McDowall), and must work to prevent Al's death. In another episode, when again the Project's funding is threatened, Sam helps a young woman successfully pass the bar; this results in her becoming one of the members of Congress who oversee the Project and in the restoration of its funding. In the episode involving Lee Harvey Oswald, while Sam and Al do not prevent the assassination of Kennedy, Sam's actions prevent Oswald from making a second shot that killed Jacqueline Kennedy in the original fictional history.
Because of the time travel aspect, many episodes allude to famous people or incidents indirectly, such as Sam suggesting to young Donald Trump that New York real estate would be valuable in the future, suggesting the lyrics of "Peggy Sue" to a teenage Buddy Holly, showing young Michael Jackson his signature moonwalk dance for the first time, giving Dr. Henry Heimlich the idea for his namesake maneuver by saving him from choking, and setting in place actions that lead to the discovery of the Watergate scandal. Two notable episodes place Sam directly at the center of significant historical events, one being the leap into Oswald. In "Goodbye Norma Jean", Sam appears as Marilyn Monroe's bodyguard, who saves her life and convinces Marilyn to remain alive for her starring role in "The Misfits". Other episodes explore the past of the main characters, like Sam saving his brother from being killed in the Vietnam War, and saving Al's marriage to Beth.
In the final episode, "Mirror Image", Sam leaps through spacetime as himself (without replacing another person), arriving at the exact time of his birth, where he meets a mysterious barkeep (Bruce McGill, who also appeared in the first episode in a different role). The barkeep is aware of Sam's situation and assures him that he himself controls the very nature and destinations of his leaps ("to make the world a better place"), and that Sam is always able to return home at any time he truly wants to. In the final episode's epilogue, Sam is shown to leap back to visit Al's wife Beth as himself again, assuring her that her husband (who was a prisoner of war at the time) will return home to her; this results in Al and Beth remaining happily married in the future, while Sam opts to continue leaping, never returning home.
Cast and characters.
In each episode, a different cast of guest characters appears, mostly the ones that Sam replaces with his leaps. Several other additional characters are referred to regularly throughout the series, but are mostly unseen.
Development and production.
The main premise for "Quantum Leap" was inspired by such movies as "Heaven Can Wait", and "Here Comes Mr. Jordan". Series creator Donald P. Bellisario saw its concept as a way of developing an original anthology series, as anthologies were unpopular with the networks.
The series ran on NBC for five seasons, from March 1989 through May 1993.
Soundtrack.
The theme for the series was written by Mike Post. It was later re-arranged for the fifth season, except for the series finale episode, which featured the original theme music. Scores for the episodes were composed by Post and Velton Ray Bunch.
A soundtrack album was first released in 1993, titled "Music from the Television Series "Quantum Leap"", dedicated to John Anderson, who played Pat Knight in "The Last Gunfighter." It was released by GNP Crescendo on CD and cassette tape.
Possible continuation.
There have been occasional announcements of plans to revisit or restart the series. In July 2002, the Sci-Fi Channel announced its development of a two-hour television film based on "Quantum Leap", which it was airing in reruns at the time, that would have served as a backdoor pilot for a possible new series, with Bellisario as executive producer. During the TV Guide panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International, Scott Bakula said that Bellisario was working on a script for a projected "Quantum Leap" feature film.
Episodes.
Broadcast history.
The "Quantum Leap" series was initially moved from Friday nights to Wednesdays. It was later moved twice away from Wednesdays to Fridays in late 1990, and to Tuesdays in late 1992. The series finale aired in its Wednesday slot in May 1993.
The most frequent time-slot for the series is indicated by "italics":
Home media.
In the 1990s, some episodes were released on VHS. In the United States, these included "Genesis" (two-part pilot episode), "Camikazi Kid", "The Color of Truth", "What Price Gloria?", "Catch a Falling Star", "Jimmy", "The Leap Home" (two-part episode), "Dreams", and "Shock Theater." In the United Kingdom, the episodes were mostly released in pairs, selling as "Genesis" (two-part pilot episode - on its own), "The Color of Truth" and "Camikazi Kid"; "The Americanization of Machiko" and "What Price Gloria?"; "Catch a Falling Star" and "Jimmy"; "The Leap Home" (two-part episode); "Dreams" and "Shock Theater."
Universal Studios chose not to obtain the necessary music licensing for all of the music for use in the "Quantum Leap: The Complete Second Season" Region 1 DVD; subsequent releases featured music replacements, with Universal's inclusion of a disclaimer on the package indicating as such (this disclaimer also began to appear on other releases of various other Universal series). As of at least 2015, the series streams on Netflix and on Amazon.com.
Universal Studios Home Entertainment has released the entire, digitally remastered, "Quantum Leap" series on DVD:
On April 13, 2016, it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment has acquired the rights to the series and will re-release the first two seasons on DVD on June 7, 2016.
Reception.
Despite its struggling start with poor broadcast timings, the series had gained a large 18–49 demographics of viewers. In 2004 and 2007, "Quantum Leap" was ranked #15 and #19 on TV Guide's "Top Cult Shows Ever."
Awards.
Along with 43 nominations, "Quantum Leap" received 17 awards (listed below).
Other media.
Comics.
Innovation Publishing produced a series of comic books which ran for thirteen issues from September 1991 through August 1993. As with the television series, each issue ended with a teaser preview of the following issue and Sam's exclamation of "Oh, boy." Among the people Sam found himself leaping into in this series were:
Few of the comic stories referenced episodes of the television series, with the exception of the ninth issue, "Up Against a Stonewall."

</doc>
<doc id="54587" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54587" title="Root beer">
Root beer

Root beer is a dark sweet beverage traditionally made using the root beer tree "Sassafras albidum" (sassafras) or the vine "Smilax ornata" (sarsaparilla) as the primary flavor. Root beer may be alcoholic or non-alcoholic, and may be carbonated or non-carbonated. Most root beer has a thick foamy head when poured. Modern, commercially produced root beer is generally sweet, foamy, carbonated, and non-alcoholic, and is flavoured using artificial sassafras. It may or may not contain caffeine.
History.
Sassafras root beverages were made by Native Americans for culinary and medicinal reasons before the arrival of Europeans in North America, but European culinary techniques have been applied to making traditional sassafras-based beverages similar to root beer since the 16th and 17th centuries. Root beer was sold in confectionery stores since the 1840s, and written recipes for root beer have been documented since the 1860s. It is possible that it was combined with soda as early as the 1850s, and root beer sold in stores was most often sold as a syrup rather than a ready-made beverage. The tradition of brewing root beer is thought to have evolved out of other small beer traditions that produced fermented drinks with very low alcohol content that were thought to be healthier to drink than possibly tainted local sources of drinking water, and enhanced by the medicinal and nutritional qualities of the ingredients used. Beyond its aromatic qualities, the medicinal benefits of sassafras were well known to both Native Americans and Europeans, and druggists began marketing root beer for its medicinal qualities.
Pharmacist Charles Elmer Hires was the first to successfully market a commercial brand of root beer. Hires developed his root tea made from sassafras in 1875, debuted a commercial version of root beer at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition in 1876, and began selling his extract. Hires was a teetotaler who wanted to call the beverage "root tea". However, his desire to market the product to Pennsylvania coal miners caused him to call his product "root beer" instead. In 1886, Hires began to bottle a beverage made from his famous extract. By 1893, root beer was distributed widely across the United States. Non-alcoholic versions of root beer became commercially successful, especially during Prohibition.
Not all traditional or commercial root beers were sassafras-based. One of Hires's early competitors was Barq's, which began selling its sarsaparilla-based root beer in 1898 and was labeled simply as "Barq's". In 1919, Roy Allen opened his root beer stand in Lodi, California, which led to the development of A&W root beer. One of Allen's innovations was that he served his homemade root beer in cold, frosty mugs. IBC is another brand of commercially produced root beer that emerged during this period and is still well-known today.
Safrole, the aromatic oil found in sassafras roots and bark that gave traditional root beer its distinctive flavour, was banned for commercially mass-produced foods and drugs by the FDA in 1960. Laboratory animals that were given oral doses of sassafras tea or sassafras oil that contained large doses of safrole developed permanent liver damage or various types of cancer. While sassafras is no longer used in commercially produced root beer and is sometimes substituted with artificial flavors, natural extracts with the safrole distilled and removed are available.
Traditional method.
One traditional recipe for making root beer involves cooking a syrup from molasses and water, letting the syrup cool for three hours, combining the root ingredients (including sassafras root, sassafras bark, and wintergreen). Yeast was added, and the beverage was left to ferment for 12 hours, after which it was strained and rebottled for secondary fermentation. This recipe would usually result in a beverage of 2% alcohol or less, although the recipe could be modified to produce a more alcoholic beverage.
Ingredients.
Commercial root beer is now produced in every U.S. state. It is a beverage almost exclusive to North America, yet there are a few brands produced in other countries, such as the Philippines and Thailand. The flavor of these beverages often varies from typical North American versions. While there is no standard recipe, the primary ingredients in modern rootbeer are filtered water, sugar and artificial sassafras flavoring, which complement other flavors. Common flavorings are vanilla, wintergreen, cherry tree bark, licorice root, sarsaparilla root, nutmeg, acacia, anise, molasses, cinnamon, sweet birch, and honey. Soybean protein is sometimes used to create a foamy quality, and caramel-coloring is used to make the beverage brown.
Ingredients in early and traditional root beers include allspice, birch bark, coriander, juniper, ginger, wintergreen, hops, burdock root, dandelion root, spikenard, pipsissewa, guaiacum chips, sarsaparilla, spicewood, wild cherry bark, yellow dock, prickly ash bark, sassafras root, vanilla beans, dog grass, molasses and licorice. Many of these ingredients are still used in traditional and commercially produced root beer today, which is often thickened, foamed, or carbonated.
Although most mainstream brands are caffeine-free, Barq's does contain caffeine.
Root beer may be made at home with processed extract obtained from a factory, or it can also be made from herbs and roots that have not yet been processed. Alcoholic and non-alcoholic traditional root beers make a thick and foamy head when poured, often enhanced by the addition of yucca extract or other thickeners.

</doc>
<doc id="54588" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54588" title="Captain Kangaroo">
Captain Kangaroo

Captain Kangaroo is an American children's television series that aired weekday mornings on the American television network CBS for nearly 30 years, from October 3, 1955 until December 8, 1984, making it the longest-running nationally broadcast children's television program of its day. In 1986, the American Program Service (now American Public Television, Boston) integrated some newly produced segments into reruns of past episodes, distributing the newer version of the series until 1993.
The show was conceived and the title character was played by Bob Keeshan, who based the show on "the warm relationship between grandparents and children". Keeshan had portrayed the original Clarabell the Clown on "The Howdy Doody Show" when it aired on NBC. "Captain Kangaroo" had a loose structure, built around life in the "Treasure House" (later known as "The Captain's Place") where the Captain (the name "kangaroo" came from the big pockets in his coat) would tell stories, meet guests, and indulge in silly stunts with regular characters, both humans and puppets. Keeshan performed as the Captain more than 9000 times over the nearly 30-year run of the show.
The show was telecast live to the East Coast and the Midwest for its first four years and broadcast on kinescope for the West Coast, as Keeshan would not perform the show live three times a day, and was in black-and-white until 1967. The May 17, 1971 episode saw two major changes on the show: The Treasure House was renovated and renamed "The Captain's Place" and the Captain replaced his navy blue coat with a red coat. In September 1981, CBS shortened the hour-long show to a half-hour, briefly retitled it "Wake Up with the Captain", and moved it to an earlier time slot; it was later moved to weekends in September 1982, and returned to an hour-long format. It was canceled by CBS at the end of 1984.
Cast.
Special celebrity guests.
Among the special celebrity guest stars who made periodic appearances over the series' run included:
Format.
The show did not have a strict format, other than the entire program taking place in and around the Treasure House (known in later years as "The Captain's Place"), where the Captain would interact with puppets, guests or other members of the cast. Even the opening sequence could change. The show would generally begin with the theme music starting up, then the Captain would unlock and open the doors of the Treasure House from the inside, and viewers would catch their first glimpse of him. Then he would put the Treasure House keys on a nail, and the music would stop. However, sometimes the Captain could not get the keys to stay on the nail, and when they fell off, the theme music would begin playing again.
One never knew exactly what would happen from one episode to the next, although at certain times of the year, such as the Christmas season, paper cutout versions of such stories as "The Littlest Snowman" would be shown.
Cartoons.
Several cartoon shorts were featured over the course of the series' run, including:
A cartoon starring a funnel-capped shape-shifting boy named "Tom Terrific" was part of the show in the 1950s and 1960s. Tom had a sidekick named Mighty Manfred the Wonder Dog, and a nemesis, Crabby Appleton. Other cartoons included "Lariat Sam," which was developed by veteran game show announcer Gene Wood, then a show staffer (who also sang the cartoon's theme song).
The British cartoon "Simon in the Land of Chalk Drawings" appeared in the 1970s, featuring a child with magic chalk who could create all sorts of short-lived creations in short adventures (the original version featured a British narrator, but Keeshan's voice was dubbed onto the cartoons for their U.S. airing).
Another British-produced cartoon, "Ludwig", about a magical egg-shaped robot, was also included around the same time as "Simon". The cartoon's musical score consisted of selections from the works of Beethoven.
Also appearing in the 1970s was "The Most Important Person", a short series of five-minute segments on the importance of life; and "The Kingdom of Could Be You", a short series of five-minute segments on the importance of careers and the work world.
There was also a cartoon series called "The Toothbrush Family". Based on an extended family of hygiene utensils as the name suggests, they would embark on adventures based in the bathroom, like water skiing in the tub, or rescuing friends caught in the drain. Episodes were generally a couple of minutes each and basically revolved around teaching children the importance of dental care.
A silent cartoon in the 1970s named "Crystal Tipps" featured the adventures of a young girl. Later reruns were narrated by the voice of Mr. Moose. Another British favorite, "The Wombles" was also featured.
The "Red & Blue" shorts from Italy were also shown.
"The Undersea Adventures of Captain Nemo", featuring a family of sea explorers, was featured as well.
"Good morning, Captain!".
Beginning in 1974 and continuing throughout the rest of the 1970s and into the 1980s, the show would open with different people wishing the Captain "good morning". Many of the openings featured non-celebrities, but some featured stars from TV shows, most of which broadcast over CBS, such as "The Bob Newhart Show" and "One Day at a Time", as well as other characters with a connection to another network, including William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy, dressed as Captain Kirk and Mr. Spock; characters from the "Peanuts" cartoons; and Fred Rogers from "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood". The montage of "good mornings" would always end with the Captain himself returning the greeting before the opening credits ran.
Regular features.
Other regular features included "The Magic Drawing Board" and the Captain's "Reading Stories" sessions, which introduced kids to stories such as "Curious George", "Make Way for Ducklings", "Stone Soup", "Caps for Sale" and "Mike Mulligan and His Steam Shovel." The Sweet Pickles books were also featured.
Songs included "Captain Kangaroo", "The Captain's Place", "Little Mary Make Believe", "Dennis Anyone", "Guess Who I Am", "Little Black Frog", "How Does the Jelly Get in the Donut", "There's a Hole in the Bottom of the Sea", "Erie Canal", "Horse in Striped Pajamas", "The Littlest Snowman", "Daniel the Cocker Spaniel", "You can Grow Up to Be President", "Spend Some Time With Your Child", and many more. Carmino Ravosa was a songwriter on the show from 1975 to 1977. On the first show of every month the Captain would have a birthday cake for all of the children with birthdays that month.
Keeshan also had a recurring role as "The Town Clown", a pantomime piece that took place in and around the exposed wagon home of a tramp-like circus clown. Like the character of Clarabelle that he played on "Howdy Doody", the Town Clown never spoke.
Favorites on the show were Grandfather Clock (voiced by Cosmo Allegretti), Rollo the Hippo and Dancing Bear.
Dancing Bear was mute and only appeared in short subject features. He often danced waltzes to background music.
One of the show's long-running gags was the "Ping Pong Ball Drop", instigated by the telling of a joke (usually a Knock-Knock joke) by Mr. Moose in which the punchline would include the words "ping pong balls". At the mention of those three words, a shower of ping pong balls would be released from above on the Captain.
The show would very often have simple black light theatre segments utilizing paper or cardboard cutouts. A notable recording of a popular song, such as Judy Garland's Decca recording of Over the Rainbow (from "The Wizard of Oz"), Mary Martin singing Never Never Land (from the original cast recording of the musical "Peter Pan"), or Danny Kaye singing Inchworm (from the Decca recording of the songs from "Hans Christian Andersen") would be heard while the cutouts played on the screen, animated by a concealed puppeteer. On other occasions, full-fledged hand puppets would "perform" to the song being played (as in the case when a hand puppet dressed in Spanish clothing performed to a recording of tenor Allan Jones singing "The Donkey Serenade").
Familiar props included a mockup of a talking cathedral-style radio that Keeshan simply called "Radio". Keeshan would turn the large knobs on "Radio" to get a conversation going. Reminiscent of the old Atwater Kent cathedrals, "Radio" had a rather interesting conversation with a smaller transistor radio in one show. Also featured was a huge Colgate toothpaste box with a large windup or clockwork key on the side. Keeshan turned the key to play a jingle ("Colgate Fluoride M-F-P/Helps Prevent the Cavity/And it Tastes Great, Naturally!") for the show's sponsor, Colgate Toothpaste.
At the end of each episode, the Captain always encouraged parents watching the show to spend some quality time with their children every day, and he would often demonstrate various creative ways in which to do so.
Theme song.
The original theme song to "Captain Kangaroo" (titled "Puffin' Billy") was used from 1955 to 1974. It was an instrumental, written by Edward G. White. The track was from a British stock music production library known as the "Chappell Recorded Music Library" which was sold through a New York agency called Emil Ascher. The tune's original title referred to a British steam locomotive. This tune was used on other programs on both sides of the Atlantic. For example, two years before "Captain Kangaroo", it served as the wrap-up music for an episode of the radio program "Rocky Fortune" called "Murder Among the Statues". In its native United Kingdom, it became famous as the theme to the weekly BBC radio program "Children's Favourites" from 1952 to 1966, and is still widely recognised by the post-war generation. It was later used in the Enid Blyton parody "Five Go Mad in Dorset" and in a number of British TV adverts, including a Captain Sensible spot. The "Puffin' Billy" theme played as the opening of each episode, with the music continuing until the Captain hung his large ring of keys on a nail (which seemed to act as a switch to turn off the music). If the Captain's keys ever slipped off the nail, the music would begin playing again.
In 1957, lyricist Mary Rogers penned lyrics to the tune, creating a newly titled "Captain Kangaroo" song.
In 1974, a new theme song titled "Good Morning, Captain" was composed for "Captain Kangaroo," written by Robert L. Brush. As the new theme used similar melodic elements from the original theme, Edward G. White's name was added to the song credits. However, due to copyright issues, the song was later re-recorded without the portion of "Puffin' Billy" featured in the first version.
During the brief "Wake Up With the Captain" era, a theme titled "Wake Up" was used.
For the show's final two seasons and the later PBS run, "Schoolhouse Rock" mainstay Lynn Ahrens (who composed and performed a few "Captain Kangaroo" songs herself) wrote a new theme, entitled "Here Comes Captain Kangaroo".
The theme song for "All New Captain Kangaroo" used the opening notes and part of the melody of the original theme as its introduction.
Bob Keeshan also recorded music for both Columbia Records and Golden Records aimed at introducing all kinds of music to children.
Schedule history.
While "Captain Kangaroo" was still in planning stages, CBS executives had the idea of hiring Al Lewis, a kids' show host in Cincinnati (ABC was running Lewis's show at that time), to host their show, but Lewis's managers refused to release him from his contract. Lewis's local kids show went off the air in Cincinnati a year after "Captain Kangaroo" left CBS.
For the first three months, "Captain Kangaroo" was only seen on weekday mornings. From then until 1968, the show was also seen on Saturday mornings, except in the 1964-1965 season, when it was replaced by a Keeshan vehicle called "Mr. Mayor". After 1968, the show was again seen only on weekdays. Except for pre-emption by news or special events, notably the three-day continuous coverage which followed the 1963 assassination of John F. Kennedy , and a few shows that were 45 minutes, the show aired a full 60 minutes on weekday mornings until 1981. It was broadcast in color from September 9, 1966 onward. The time slot for the show was 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. EST, after which CBS would allow most affiliate stations to air local programming or blocks of sitcom reruns, game shows, or talk shows until time for the network's soap opera time slots.
The audience of children could never compete in the ratings with such entertainment/news shows as "The Today Show", although "Captain Kangaroo" won Emmy Awards three times as Outstanding Children's entertainment series in 1978–1979, 1982–1983 and 1983–1984. But in the fall of 1981, to make more room for the expansion of "CBS Morning News", the Captain was moved to an earlier time slot of 7 a.m. and cut to 30 minutes, sporting the new title "Wake Up with the Captain". The show was moved again in the spring of 1982 to 6:30 a.m.; a time when few children (or adults) were awake. In the fall of 1982, it returned to an hour format, but was moved to Saturday mornings at 7 a.m. Eastern Time and 6 a.m. in other time zones. Reruns from the previous season were offered to CBS affiliates to run Sunday morning in place of the cartoon reruns offered before, but most declined. One-third of affiliates no longer ran the show at all after 1982, and it was again reduced to a half-hour in the fall of 1984. Angered over the reduction of his program for the second time, Keeshan chose to step down at the end of 1984, after his contract with CBS expired.
Just over a year later, in October 13, 1986, "Captain Kangaroo" returned in reruns on PBS television stations, with funding from public television stations, School Zone Publishing Company and from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. American Public Television, then known as the "Interregional Program Service", distributed the show, along with Britder Associates (Keeshan's production company), and the Riehl Company, owned by former WPBT station manager Dale Riehl.
The show was on the air for 29 years, making it one of the longest-running network children's program series. "Sesame Street", which still airs, holds the record at 46 years. Several of the original "Sesame Street" writers and producers were hired from the "Captain Kangaroo" staff to help produce and direct the new program when it went on the air in 1969.
The original director of the program was Peter Birch, who helmed the program for its first 25 years. Producer Jim Hirschfeld took over as director following Birch's heart attack in 1980 and continued directing, as well as producing throughout the rest of the show's run, including the new segments inserted into the PBS reruns, until it went off the air in 1993.
The cast of "Captain Kangaroo" also hosted the CBS coverage of the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade for several years in the 1960s.
Schwinn marketing.
From the late 1950s, the Schwinn Bicycle Company made use of children's television programming to expand its dominance of the child and youth bicycle markets. The company was an early sponsor (from 1958) of "Captain Kangaroo". The Captain himself was enlisted to sell Schwinn-brand bicycles to the show's audience, typically six years old and under. At the end of each live Schwinn marketing promotion, Bob Keeshan would intone, "Prices slightly higher in the South and in the West". The on-air marketing program was deemed successful by Schwinn, and the company increased its market share of child and youth bicycles throughout the 1960s.
The marketing program continued through the 1971 season, when the Federal Trade Commission's Staff Report, "Guidelines on Advertising to Children", recommended against Schwinn's on-air marketing practices using the show's host. In response, Schwinn and the show's writers altered the format in 1972. The Captain no longer insisted that his viewers purchase a Schwinn, but instead made regular on-air consultations of a new character, "Mr. Schwinn Dealer". A 1973 internal company news article concluded that the show's child audience had difficulty separating Schwinn's sales pitch from that of the show.
Popular culture.
Rock musician Frank Zappa wrote a composition named "Mr. Green Genes" on his album "Uncle Meat" and a sequel, "Son of Mr. Green Genes" on his album "Hot Rats". This led to the urban legend that Zappa was the son of Hugh Brannum, who played Mr. Green Jeans, a myth Zappa officially dispelled in his 1989 autobiography, "The Real Frank Zappa Book", as did Keeshan in his 1996 autobiography, "Good Morning, Captain".
Many popular songs make reference to "Captain Kangaroo", including the Statler Brothers' 1965 hit song "Flowers on the Wall", the "Weird Al" Yankovic song "The Brady Bunch", the Bloodhound Gang's "Your Only Friends Are Make Believe".
In the 1975 TV series "The Shari Show", hosted by puppeteer and ventriloquist Shari Lewis, one of the puppets is a kangaroo named "Captain Person", who is the host of a children's TV show.
The character of "Captain Kangaroo" himself was given a brief cameo in the 2009 action comedy "Black Dynamite", a parody of 1970s Blaxploitation films.
Revival.
In 1997–1998, a sequel revival series titled The All New Captain Kangaroo was created by Saban Entertainment. John McDonough played the Captain on this version, which was shot in Tampa, Florida. Keeshan was invited to appear as a special guest called "The Admiral", but after seeing sample episodes, he declined to appear or have any association with the new incarnation. It ran for one season in syndication and inspired a spin-off show, "Mister Moose's Fun Time"; it served as the centerpiece for a programming block on the then newly launched Fox Family Channel (half-owned by Saban), dubbed "Captain Kangaroo's Treasure House", from 1998 to 2000; the block also featured reruns of "Shining Time Station" and "Magic Adventures of Mumfie".
In 2011, the trademark for "Captain Kangaroo" was acquired by The Cashin Comedy Co. In a blog, the Captain is portrayed by Pat Cashin.

</doc>
<doc id="54589" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54589" title="Bob Keeshan">
Bob Keeshan

Robert James "Bob" Keeshan (June 27, 1927 – January 23, 2004) was an American television producer and actor. He created and played the title role in the children's television program "Captain Kangaroo", which ran from 1955 to 1984, the longest-running nationally broadcast children's television program of its day.
Keeshan also played the original "Clarabell the Clown" on the "Howdy Doody" television program.
Youth, education, military.
Keeshan was born in Lynbrook, New York. After an early graduation from Forest Hills High School in Queens, New York in 1945, during World War II, he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps Reserve, but was still in the United States when Japan surrendered. He attended Fordham University on the GI Bill and few years at Hillsdale College.
Pioneering children's television.
Network television programs began shortly after the end of the war. "Howdy Doody", an early show which premiered in 1947 on NBC, was one of the first. Debuting on January 3, 1948, Keeshan played "Clarabell the Clown", a silent Auguste clown who communicated by honking several horns attached to a belt around his waist. One horn meant "yes"; another meant "no". Clarabell often sprayed Buffalo Bob Smith with a seltzer bottle and played practical jokes. Keeshan gave up the role in 1952, and was replaced.
By September 21, 1953, Keeshan was back on the air on WABC-TV (New York City), in a new children’s show, "Time for Fun". He played Corny the Clown, and this time he spoke. Later that same year, in addition to "Time for Fun", Keeshan began "Tinker's Workshop", a program aimed at preschoolers, with him playing the grandfather-like Tinker.
Developing ideas from "Tinker's Workshop", Keeshan and his long-time friend Jack Miller submitted the concept of Captain Kangaroo to the CBS network, which was looking for innovative approaches to children's television programming. CBS approved the show, and Keeshan starred as the title character when it premiered on CBS on October 3, 1955. Keeshan described his character as based on "the warm relationship between grandparents and children." The show was an immediate success, and he served as its host for nearly three decades. 
Recurring characters included his sidekick (and fan favorite) Mr. Green Jeans (played by Hugh "Lumpy" Brannum) and puppets such as "Bunny Rabbit" and "Mr. Moose".
The "New York Times" commented: "Captain Kangaroo, a round-faced, pleasant, mustachioed man possessed of an unshakable calm ... was one of the most enduring characters television ever produced."
Keeshan also had a Saturday morning show called "Mister Mayor" during the 1964–65 season. Keeshan, in his role as the central character in both "Captain Kangaroo" and "Mister Mayor", heavily promoted the products of the Schwinn Bicycle Co., a sponsor, directly on-air to his audience. By 1972, Keeshan had introduced another character on "Captain Kangaroo" to recommend Schwinn products, "Mr. Schwinn Dealer", due to the Federal Trade Commission ruling against children's show hosts directly endorsing their sponsor's products during their programs after 1969.
Heart attack and cancellation.
Keeshan suffered a severe heart attack just moments after stepping off a plane at Toronto International Airport on July 13, 1981, which pushed the start of a revamped version of his show back to at least mid-August. He had come to the city to accept a children's service award.
Keeshan underwent triple-bypass surgery and received an estimated 5,000 get-well wishes from fans.
Following the heart attack, Keeshan received three Emmy awards for Outstanding Performer in 1982, 1983, and 1984. Despite these accolades, Keeshan's show was shortened from its hour-long format to a half hour in 1981, to make room for the expansion of the "CBS Morning News" lineup. The program was retitled "Wake Up with the Captain", and was moved to a new 7 AM time slot. At the start of 1982, the show was rescheduled to an even earlier slot of 6:30 AM. In the fall of 1982, CBS installed it as a weekend-only hour offering, and two years later, in the fall of 1984, the show became a Saturday half-hour entry.
Tired of CBS's constant reductions of his show, Keeshan left "Captain Kangaroo" when his contract with the network ended in December 1984, just nine months shy of the show's 30th anniversary. By 1987, repeats of the show were airing daily on many PBS stations.
Keeshan's show was given a farewell of sorts with "Captain Kangaroo and Friends", a prime-time network TV special that aired in 1985.
After "Captain Kangaroo".
After "Captain Kangaroo" ended, Keeshan hosted 1985's "CBS Storybreak", which featured animated versions of children's literature. Keeshan appeared in framing sequences for the animated stories, showcasing the book versions and suggesting similar books for the viewers to seek out. In 1987, Keeshan founded Corporate Family Solutions with former Tennessee Republican Governor Lamar Alexander. The company provided day-care programs to businesses.
Keeshan lived on Melbury Road in Babylon Village, Long Island, New York before moving to spend the last 14 years of his life in Norwich, Vermont, where he became a children's advocate as well as an author. His memoirs, entitled "Good Morning, Captain", were published in 1995 by Fairview Press. He was a strong advocate against video game violence and took part in congressional hearings in 1993. In addition, he joined with parents groups in the 1980s who protested children's TV shows based on then present toys on the market, like "He-Man" and Transformers; he felt that toys turned into TV shows did not teach children anything about the real world. He also made a rare film appearance in "The Stupids" in 1996.
Keeshan was an adopted member of the Dartmouth College Class of 1942, receiving an honorary doctorate from the College in 1975. Le Moyne College, a Jesuit liberal arts college in Syracuse, New York, awarded him a Doctor of Humane Letters, "honoris causa," in 1983. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by the College of New Rochelle in 1985, after having served for several years on its board of trustees. In 1997 he received an honorary doctorate from Middlebury College, which was attended by his grandson Britton Keeshan, for his work in children's literacy.
In the 1990s, Keeshan expressed an interest in bringing back a new version of "Captain Kangaroo" to television as a gentler and kinder answer to the violent cartoons on children's television. Despite having sponsors and television stations lined up, Keeshan was unable to obtain permission from ICM, the company which owned the rights to Captain Kangaroo.
Death.
Keeshan died in Windsor, Vermont, on January 23, 2004 at age 76. He was survived by three children, Michael Derek, Laurie Margaret, and Maeve Jeanne. His wife of 45 years, Anne Jeanne Laurie Keeshan, died February 25, 1996. Keeshan's grandson, Britton Keeshan, became the youngest person at that time to have climbed the Seven Summits by climbing Mount Everest in May 2004. He carried photographs of his grandfather on that ascent, and buried a photo of the two of them at the summit.
Keeshan was buried in Saint Joseph's Cemetery in Babylon, New York.
Awards.
Keeshan received many awards, including:
Urban legend.
An urban legend claims that actor Lee Marvin said on "The Tonight Show" that he had fought alongside Keeshan at the Battle of Iwo Jima in February–March, 1945. However, Marvin not only never said this, but had not served on Iwo Jima (having been hospitalized from June 1944 until October 1945, from wounds received in the Battle of Saipan), and Keeshan himself never saw combat, having enlisted too late to serve overseas.

</doc>
<doc id="54592" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54592" title="Cicada">
Cicada

The cicadas ( or ) are a superfamily, the Cicadoidea, of insects in the order Hemiptera (true bugs). They are in the suborder Auchenorrhyncha, along with smaller jumping bugs such as leafhoppers and froghoppers. It is divided into the Tettigarctidae, with two species in Australia, and Cicadidae, with more than 1,300 species described from around the world; many undescribed species remain.
Cicadas have prominent eyes set wide apart, short antennae, and membranous front wings. They have an exceptionally loud song, produced not by stridulation but by vibrating drumlike tymbals rapidly. The earliest known fossil Cicadomorpha appeared in the Upper Permian period; extant species occur all around the world in temperate to tropical climates. They typically live in trees, feeding on sap, and laying their eggs in a slit in the bark. Most cicadas are cryptic, singing at night to avoid predators. The periodic cicadas spend most of their lives as underground nymphs, emerging only after 13 or 17 years, most likely to reduce losses by satiating their predators.
Cicadas have been featured in literature since the time of Homer's Iliad, and as motifs in art from the Chinese Shang dynasty. They have been used in myths and folklore to represent carefree living and immortality. Cicadas are eaten in various countries, including China where the nymphs are served deep-fried in Shandong cuisine.
Etymology.
The name is a direct derivation of the Latin "cicada", meaning "tree cricket". American English of central Appalachia retains the name "jarfly". In ancient Greek, it was called a "tettix", and in modern Greek τζιτζίκας, "tzitzikas"—both names being onomatopoeic.
Taxonomy and diversity.
Cicadas are arranged into two families: Tettigarctidae and Cicadidae. There are two extant species of Tettigarctidae, one in southern Australia, and the other in Tasmania. The family Cicadidae is subdivided into the subfamilies Cicadinae, Tettigadinae, and Cicadettinae; they are found on all continents except Antarctica. Some previous works also included a family-level taxon called the Tibiceninae. The largest species is the Malaysian emperor cicada "Megapomponia imperatoria"; its wingspan is up to about . They are also notable for the great length of time some species take to mature.
There are at least 1300 cicada species worldwide with the majority being in the tropics. Most genera are restricted to a single biogeographical region and many species have a very limited range. This high degree of endemism has been used to study the biogeography of complex island groups such as in Indonesia and the Orient. There are about 200 described species in Australia and New Zealand, around 150 in South Africa, over 170 in America north of Mexico, at least 800 in Latin America, and over 200 in Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific. There are about 100 species in the Palaearctic. A few species are found in southern Europe, and a single species in England, the New Forest cicada, "Melampsalta montana", which also occurs in continental Europe.
Most of the North American species are in the genus "Neotibicen": the "annual" or "jar fly" or "dog-day cicadas" (so named because they emerge in late July and August). The best-known North American genus, however, is "Magicicada". These periodical cicadas have an extremely long life cycle of 13 or 17 years, suddenly and briefly emerging in large numbers.
Australian cicadas are found on tropical islands and cold coastal beaches around Tasmania; in tropical wetlands; high and low deserts; alpine areas of New South Wales and Victoria; large cities like Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane; and Tasmanian highlands and snowfields. Many of them go by common names such as cherry nose, brown baker, red eye, greengrocer, yellow Monday, whisky drinker, double drummer, and black prince. The Australian greengrocer, "Cyclochila australasiae", is among the loudest insects in the world.
Forty-two species from five genera populate New Zealand, ranging from sea level to mountain tops, and all are endemic to New Zealand and the surrounding islands (Norfolk Island, New Caledonia).
Palaeontology.
Fossil Cicadomorpha first appeared in the Upper Permian. The superfamily Palaeontinoidea contains three families. The Upper Permian Dunstaniidae are found in Australia and South Africa, and also in younger rocks from China. The Upper Triassic Mesogereonidae are found in Australia and South Africa.
The Palaeontinidae or "giant cicadas" come from the Jurassic and Upper Cretaceous of Eurasia and South America. The first of these was a forewing discovered in the Taynton Limestone Formation of Oxfordshire, England; it was initially described as a butterfly in 1873, before being recognised as a cicada and renamed "Palaeontina oolitica".
Biology.
Description.
Cicadas are large insects made conspicuous by the courtship calls of the males. They are characterised by having three joints in their tarsi, and having small antennae with conical bases and three to six segments, including a seta at the tip. The Auchenorrhyncha differ from other hemipterans by having a rostrum that arises from the posteroventral part of the head, complex sound-producing membranes, and a mechanism for linking the wings which involves a down-rolled edging on the rear of the forewing and an upwardly-protruding flap on the hind wing. Cicadas lack the ability to jump as exhibited by other members of the Auchenorrhyncha. Another defining characteristic is the adaptations of the forelimbs of nymphs for underground life. The relict family Tettigarctidae differ from the Cicadidae in having the prothorax extending as far as the scutellum, and by lacking the tympanal apparatus.
The adult insect, known as an imago, is in total length in most species, although the largest, the empress cicada ("Megapomponia imperatoria"), has a head-body length of about , and its wingspan is . Cicadas have prominent compound eyes set wide apart on the sides of the head. The short antennae protrude between the eyes or in front of them. They also have three small ocelli located on the top of the head in a triangle between the two large eyes, and this distinguishes cicadas from other members of the Hemiptera. The mouthparts form a long sharp rostrum which they insert into the plant to feed. The post-clypeus is a large, nose-like structure that lies between the eyes and makes up most of the front of the head: it contains the pumping musculature.
The thorax has three segments and houses the powerful wing muscles. They have two pairs of membranous wings that may be hyaline, cloudy or pigmented. The wing venation varies between species and may help in identification. The middle thoracic segment has an operculum on the underside which may extend posteriorly and obscure parts of the abdomen. The abdomen is segmented, with the hindermost segments housing the reproductive organs, and terminates in females with a large, saw-edged ovipositor. In males, the abdomen is largely hollow and used as a resonating chamber.
The surface of the fore-wing is super-hydrophobic; it is covered with minute waxy cones, blunt spikes which create a water-repellent film. Rain rolls across the surface, removing dirt in the process. In the absence of rain, dew condenses on the wings. When the droplets coalesce, they leap several millimetres into the air, which also serves to clean the wings. It has been found that bacteria landing on the wing surface are not repelled, rather their membranes are torn apart by the nanoscale-sized spikes, making the wing surface the first-known biomaterials that can kill bacteria.
Temperature regulation.
Desert cicadas such as "Diceroprocta apache" are unusual among insects in controlling their temperature by evaporative cooling, analogous to sweating in mammals. When their temperature rises above about 39 °C, they suck excess sap from the food plants and extrude the excess water through pores in the tergum at a modest cost in energy. Such a rapid loss of water can be sustained only by feeding on water rich xylem sap. At lower temperatures, feeding cicadas would normally need to excrete the excess water. By evaporative cooling, desert cicadas can reduce their bodily temperature by some 5 °C. Some non-desert cicada species such as "Magicicada tredecem" also cool themselves evaporatively, but less dramatically. Conversely, many other cicadas can voluntarily raise their body temperatures as much as above ambient temperature.
Song.
The "singing" of male cicadas is not stridulation such as many familiar species of insects produce — for example crickets. Instead, male cicadas have a noisemaker called a tymbal below each side of the anterior abdominal region. The tymbals are structures of the exoskeleton formed into complex membranes with thin, membranous portions and thickened ribs. Contraction of internal muscles buckles the tymbals inwards, thereby producing a click; on relaxation of the muscles, the tymbals return to their original position, producing another click. The male abdomen is largely hollow, and acts as a sound box. By rapidly vibrating these membranes, a cicada combines the clicks into apparently continuous notes, and enlarged chambers derived from the tracheae serve as resonance chambers with which it amplifies the sound. The cicada also modulates the song by positioning its abdomen toward or away from the substrate. Partly by the pattern in which it combines the clicks, each species produces its own distinctive mating songs and acoustic signals, ensuring that the song attracts only appropriate mates.
Average temperature of the natural habitat for the South American species "Fidicina rana" is approximately . During sound production, the temperature of the tymbal muscles was found to be significantly higher. Many cicadas sing most actively during the hottest hours of a summer day; roughly a 24-hour cycle.
Although only males produce the cicadas' distinctive sound, both sexes have membraneous structures called tympana by which they detect sounds; the equivalent of having ears. Males disable their own tympana while calling, thereby preventing damage to their hearing; a necessity partly because some cicadas produce sounds up to 120 dB (SPL) which is among the loudest of all insect-produced sounds. The song is loud enough to cause permanent hearing loss in humans should the cicada sing just outside the listener's ear. In contrast, some small species have songs so high in pitch that the noise is inaudible to humans.
For the human ear, it is often difficult to tell precisely where a cicada song originates. The pitch is nearly constant, the sound is continuous to the human ear, and cicadas sing in scattered groups. In addition to the mating song, many species have a distinct distress call, usually a broken and erratic sound emitted by the insect when seized or panicked. Some species also have courtship songs, generally quieter, and produced after a female has been drawn to the calling song. Males also produce "encounter calls", whether in courtship or to maintain personal space within choruses.
The song of cicadas is considered by entomologists to be unique to a given species, and a number of resources exist to collect and analyse cicada sounds.
Life cycle.
In some species of cicada, the males remain in one location and call to attract females. Sometimes several males aggregate and call in chorus. In other species, the males move from place to place, usually with quieter calls while searching for females. The Tettigarctidae differ from other cicadas in producing vibrations in the substrate rather than audible sounds. After mating, the female cuts slits into the bark of a twig where she deposits her eggs.
When the eggs hatch, the newly hatched nymphs drop to the ground and burrow. Cicadas live underground as nymphs for most of their lives at depths down to about . Nymphs have strong front legs for digging and excavating chambers in close proximity to roots where they feed on xylem sap. In the process, their bodies and interior of the burrow become coated in anal fluids. In wet habitats, larger species construct mud towers above ground in order to aerate their burrows. In the final nymphal instar, they construct an exit tunnel to the surface and emerge. They then moult (shed their skins) on a nearby plant for the last time, and emerge as adults. The exuviae or abandoned exoskeletons remain, still clinging to the bark of the tree.
Most cicadas go through a life cycle that lasts from two to five years. Some species have much longer life cycles, such as the North American genus, "Magicicada", which has a number of distinct "broods" that go through either a 17-year or, in some parts of the world, a 13-year life cycle. The long life cycles may have developed as a response to predators, such as the cicada killer wasp and praying mantis. A specialist predator with a shorter life cycle of at least two years could not reliably prey upon the cicadas.
Diet.
Cicada nymphs suck sap from the xylem of various species of trees, including oak, cypress, willow, ash, and maple. While it is common folklore that adults do not eat, they actually do drink plant sap utilizing their sucking mouthparts.
Locomotion.
Cicadas, like other Auchenorrhyncha, are adapted for jumping (saltation), as well as the usual insect modes of locomotion, walking and flight. However, they do not walk or run well, and take to the wing to travel distances greater than a few centimetres. Cicadas can extend their hind legs in under a millisecond to execute a jump, implying elastic storage of energy for sudden release.
Predators, parasites and pathogens.
Cicadas are commonly eaten by birds and sometimes by squirrels, as well as bats, wasps, mantids, spiders and robber flies. In times of mass emergence of cicadas, various amphibians, fish, reptiles, mammals and birds change their foraging habits so as to benefit from the glut. Newly hatched nymphs may be eaten by ants, and nymphs living underground are preyed on by burrowing mammals like moles. In Australia, cicadas are preyed on by the Australian cicada killer wasp ("Exeirus lateritius"), which stings and stuns cicadas high in the trees, making them drop to the ground where the cicada-hunter mounts and carries them, pushing with its hind legs, sometimes over a distance of a hundred meters, until they can be shoved down into its burrow, where the numb cicada is placed onto one of many shelves in a "catacomb", to form the food-stock for the wasp grub that grows out of the egg deposited there.
Several fungal diseases infect and kill adult cicadas while another entomopathogenic fungus, "Cordyceps" spp., attacks nymphs. "Massospora cicadina" specifically attacks the adults of periodical cicadas, the spores remaining dormant in the soil between outbreaks.
Antipredator adaptations.
Cicadas use a variety of strategies to evade predators. Large cicadas can fly rapidly to escape if disturbed. Many are extremely well camouflaged to evade predators such as birds that hunt by sight. As well as being coloured like tree bark, they are disruptively patterned to break up their outlines; their partly transparent wings are held over the body and pressed close to the substrate. The wings are antireflective, avoiding the typical shine of insect cuticle which would break the cicada's camouflage.
The periodical cicadas ("Magicicada") make use of predator satiation: they emerge, all at once, at long intervals of 13 or 17 years; their juveniles are probably the longest-lived of all insect development stages. Since the number of cicadas in any given area exceeds the amount predators can eat, all available predators are satiated, and the remaining cicadas can breed in peace.
Some cicadas such as "Hemisciera maculipennis" display bright deimatic flash coloration on their hindwings when threatened; the sudden contrast helps to startle predators, giving the cicadas time to escape. The majority of cicadas are nocturnal and rely on camouflage when at rest, but some species are aposematic; the Malaysian "Huechys sanguinea" has conspicuous red and black warning coloration, is diurnal, and boldly flies about in full view of possible predators.
Predators such as the sarcophagid fly "Emblemasoma" hunt cicadas by sound, being attracted to their song. Singing males soften their song so that the attention of the listener gets distracted to neighbouring louder singers, or cease singing altogether as a predator approaches. It has been asserted that loud cicada song, especially in chorus, repels predators, but observations of predator responses refute the claim.
In human culture.
In art and literature.
Cicadas have been featured in literature since the time of Homer's "Iliad", and as motifs in decorative art from the Chinese Shang dynasty (1766–1122 B.C.). They are described by Aristotle in his "History of Animals" and by Pliny the Elder in his "Natural History"; their mechanism of sound production is mentioned by Hesiod in his poem "Works and Days" "when the Skolymus flowers, and the tuneful "Tettix" sitting on his tree in the weary summer season pours forth from under his wings his shrill song". In the classic 14th-century Chinese novel "Romance of the Three Kingdoms", Diaochan took her name from the sable ("diāo") tails and jade decorations in the shape of cicadas ("chán"), which adorned the hats of high-level officials. In Latin America, the mariachi song """" ("The Cicada") romanticises the insect as a creature that sings until it dies. In the Japanese novel "The Tale of Genji", the title character poetically likens one of his many love interests to a cicada for the way she delicately sheds her scarf the way a cicada sheds its shell when molting. A cicada exuviae plays a role in the manga "Winter Cicada". Cicadas are a frequent subject of haiku, where, depending on type, they can indicate spring, summer or autumn.
In mythology and folklore.
Cicadas have been used as money, in folk medicine, to forecast the weather, to provide song (in China), and in folklore and myths around the world. In France, the cicada represents the folklore of Provence and the Mediterranean cities.
The cicada has represented since classical antiquity. Jean de La Fontaine began his collection of fables "Les fables de La Fontaine" with the story "La Cigale et la Fourmi" ("The Cicada and the Ant") based on one of Aesop's fables: in it the cicada spends the summer singing while the ant stores away food, and finds herself without food when the weather turns bitter.
The cicada symbolises rebirth and immortality in Chinese tradition. In the Chinese essay "Thirty-Six Stratagems", the phrase "to shed the golden cicada skin" (金蝉脱壳, pinyin: "jīnchán tuōké") is the poetic name for using a decoy (leaving the exuviae) to fool enemies. In the Chinese classic novel "Journey to the West" (16th century), the protagonist Priest of Tang was named the Golden Cicada.
In Japan, the cicada is associated with the summer season. According to Lafcadio Hearn, the song of "Meimuna opalifera", called "tsuku-tsuku boshi", is said to indicate the end of summer, and it is called so because of its particular call.
In an Ancient Greek myth, Tithonus eventually turns into a cicada after being granted immortality, but not eternal youth, by Zeus. The Greeks also used a cicada sitting on a harp as emblematic of music.
As food and folk medicine.
Cicadas were eaten in Ancient Greece, and are consumed today in China, both as adults and (more often) as nymphs, Malaysia, Burma, Latin America, and the Congo. Female cicadas are prized for being meatier. Shells of cicadas are employed in traditional Chinese medicines.
In 2011, cicadas were incorporated into a single batch of ice cream in Columbia, Missouri, at Sparky's. The ice creamery was advised by the public health department against making a second batch, a suggestion with which store owners complied.
As pests.
Cicadas feed on sap, and are benign to humans; they do not bite or sting in a true sense, but may occasionally mistake a person's arm for a plant limb and attempt to feed.
Cicadas are not major agricultural pests but in some outbreak years, trees may be overwhelmed by the sheer numbers of females laying their eggs in the shoots. Small trees may wilt and larger trees may lose small branches. Although in general, the feeding activities of the nymphs do little damage, during the year before an outbreak of periodic cicadas, the large nymphs feed heavily and plant growth may suffer. Some species have turned from wild grasses to sugar cane, and this has affected the crop adversely, and in a few isolated cases, females have oviposited on food crops such as date palms, grape vines, citrus trees, asparagus and cotton.
Cicadas sometimes cause damage to amenity shrubs and trees, mainly in the form of scarring left on tree branches where the females laid their eggs. Branches of young trees may die as a result.

</doc>
<doc id="54594" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54594" title="Scott Bakula">
Scott Bakula

Scott Stewart Bakula (; born October 9, 1954) is an American actor best known for his lead roles in two science-fiction television series: as Sam Beckett on "Quantum Leap" (for which he received four Emmy Award nominations and a Golden Globe Award), and as Captain Jonathan Archer on "". 
Bakula starred on the comedy-drama series "Men of a Certain Age", and guest-starred in seasons two and three of NBC's "Chuck" as the title character's father Stephen J. Bartowski. He guest starred on HBO's "Looking" as entrepreneur Lynn. In 2014 he began playing Special Agent Dwayne Cassius Pride on "".
Early life.
Bakula was born in St. Louis, Missouri, the son of Sally (née Zumwinkel) and J. Stewart Bakula, a lawyer. He has a younger brother and a younger sister. His surname comes from partial Croatian ancestry. He attended Jefferson College, followed by the University of Kansas for a time, but left, saying,
Career.
Bakula moved to New York City in 1976, where he made his Broadway debut playing baseball legend Joe DiMaggio in "", and appeared in the well-received Off-Broadway production "Three Guys Naked from the Waist Down"; he would later appear in its Pasadena Playhouse production. The success of "Three Guys" Off-Broadway brought him attention, and when his next show, the musical "Nightclub Confidential", which co-starred his wife Krista Neumann, moved to Los Angeles, he moved there at the urging of his California agent, Maggie Henderson, and his New York agent, Jerry Hogan. As Bakula recalled in 2000,
He was cast in two short-lived series: "Gung Ho" and "Eisenhower & Lutz". During a Hollywood writers' strike, he returned to New York to star in "Romance/Romance", and then afterward landed the lead role opposite co-star Dean Stockwell in the science fiction television series "Quantum Leap". Bakula played time traveler Dr. Sam Beckett, who was trapped by a malfunction of his time machine to correct things gone wrong in the past. His performance in this program would earn him a Golden Globe Award (along with three nominations) and four Emmy Award nominations for Best Actor as well as five consecutive Viewers for Quality Television Awards for Best Actor in a Quality Drama Series.
In 1995, Bakula appeared on the cover of "Playgirl". He voiced Danny Cat in the animated film, "Cats Don't Dance" (1997), singing in one number with Natalie Cole. Bakula played the aging veteran pitcher Gus Cantrell in ' (1998), the final movie in the "Major League" trilogy. He also played Jim Olmeyer, same-sex partner of Sam Robards' Jim Berkley, in the film "American Beauty" (1999). As Jonathan Archer on ', Bakula played the captain of Earth's first long-range interstellar ship. In 2006, he reprised the role of Archer for the "" PC and Xbox 360 video games as a voice-over. Bakula starred in the musical "Shenandoah", a play which also provided his first professional theatrical role in 1976, at Ford's Theatre, in 2006. Bakula is heard singing "Pig Island" on Sandra Boynton's children's CD "Philadelphia Chickens", which is labeled as being "For all ages except 43." Scott Bakula said that he might be starring as Sam in a "Quantum Leap" film as stated in "TV Guide Magazine" along with Dean Stockwell. At Comic Con 2010, he announced that a script was being worked on and that while he would be in the movie, he would not be in the main role.
Bakula performed various songs from his career for a one-night-only performance entitled "An Evening with Scott Bakula" at Sidney Harman Hall on January 18, 2008, as a benefit for the restoration of the historic Ford's Theater. Bakula had three appearances in 2008. He appeared as Atty. Jack Ross in an episode of "Boston Legal", "Glow in the Dark", which aired on February 12, 2008 on the ABC network. From March 4 - April 20, he starred as Tony Hunter in the world premiere of "Dancing in the Dark" at The Old Globe in San Diego, California. "Dancing in the Dark" is based on the movie "The Band Wagon" (1953), which starred Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse. Bakula appeared as the character Chris Fulbright in the five episode run of the Tracey Ullman sketch comedy series "State of the Union" on Showtime.
Bakula appeared in the dark comedy film "The Informant!" (2009) as Brian Shepard, an FBI agent working with the title character, Mark Whitacre, (played by Matt Damon). In April 2009, he began a recurring role on the television series "Chuck" as Stephen J. Bartowski, the eponymous character's long-lost father. From July 31 to August 2, 2009, he starred as Nathan Detroit in three performances of "Guys and Dolls" at Hollywood Bowl. Beginning in December 2009, Bakula began appearing as Terry, one of the three lead characters, along with Ray Romano (Joe) and Andre Braugher (Owen), in TNT's hour-long comedy/drama "Men of a Certain Age". In 2011, he performed a voice cameo in the film "Source Code" as a slight nod to his character on "Quantum Leap", with his catchphrase of "Oh, boy." and appeared in the feature-length documentary "The Captains", which was written and directed by William Shatner, Bakula is interviewed by the original "Star Trek" captain about his life and career leading up to his performances as Captain Jonathan Archer in "Star Trek: Enterprise". In the movie, Shatner interviews Bakula at his ranch in California where the pair ride horses and discuss the pitfalls that come with a career in television. In September 2011, Bakula starred in "Terrible Advice" by Saul Rubinek at the Menier Chocolate Factory. In April to May 2012, he guest starred in the last five episodes of "Desperate Housewives" as Bree Van de Kamp's criminal defense lawyer and third husband. In April 2013, he made a guest appearance on "Two and a Half Men" as a car dealer.In August 2013, it was announced Bakula would have a recurring role in the first season of HBO's new series, "Looking". He also appeared in the film "Geography Club" (2013).
In February 2014, Bakula was cast as the lead in a backdoor pilot for the "NCIS" spin-off series, "", which began as a two-part episode of its parent series in the spring season of 2014. "NCIS: New Orleans" has officially been renewed for a second season.
Personal life.
Bakula married Krista Neumann in 1981 and had two children, Chelsy and Cody. They divorced in 1995. He married actress Chelsea Field in 1996 and they have two children, Wil Botfield and Owen Barrett.
Bakula says he was "...hardly ever home for four and a half seasons" of "Quantum Leap", so he chose to prioritize his family life on later projects. His "Star Trek: Enterprise" contract required that filming be completed by 6 PM every Wednesday so he could have dinner with his family. During filming of "NCIS: New Orleans", he returns home to Los Angeles every weekend to spend time with his wife.

</doc>
<doc id="54595" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54595" title="Charles Rennie Mackintosh">
Charles Rennie Mackintosh

Charles Rennie Mackintosh (7 June 1868 – 10 December 1928) was a Scottish architect, designer, water colourist and artist. He was a designer in the Post-Impressionist movement and also the best known representative of Art Nouveau in the United Kingdom. He had considerable influence on European design. He was born in Glasgow and died in London.
Early life and education.
Charles Rennie Mackintosh was born at 70 Parson Street, Townhead, Glasgow, on 7 June 1868, the fourth of 11 children and second son of William McIntosh, the superintendent and chief clerk of the City of Glasgow Police, and his wife, Margaret Rennie. Mackintosh grew up in the Townhead and Dennistoun areas of Glasgow, and he attended Reid's Public School and the Allan Glen's Institution. 
In 1890 Mackintosh was the second winner of the Alexander Thomson Travelling Studentship, set up for the "furtherance of the study of ancient classic architecture, with special reference to the principles illustrated in Mr. Thomson's works."
Name.
He changed the spelling of his name from 'McIntosh' to 'Mackintosh' for unknown reasons, as his father did before him, around 1893. Confusion continues to surround the use of his name with 'Rennie' sometimes incorrectly substituted for his first name of 'Charles'. The modern use of 'Rennie Mackintosh' as a surname is also incorrect and he was never known as such in his lifetime; 'Rennie' being a middle name which he used often in writing his name. Signatures took various forms including 'C.R. Mackintosh' and 'Chas. R. Mackintosh.' His surname was thus 'Mackintosh'.
Career and family.
Upon his return, he resumed work with the Honeyman and Keppie architectural practice where he started his first major architectural project, the Glasgow Herald Building (now known as The Lighthouse), in 1899. He was engaged to marry his employer's sister, Jessie Keppie.
However, in 1892, Mackintosh met fellow artist Margaret MacDonald at the Glasgow School of Art. He and fellow student Herbert MacNair, also an apprentice at Honeyman and Keppie, were introduced to Margaret and her sister Frances MacDonald by the head of the Glasgow School of Art, Francis Henry Newbery, who thought that there were similarities in their work. Margaret and Charles married on 22 August 1900. The couple had no children. MacNair and Frances would also marry. The four companions would become known as the collaborative group "The Four", prominent members of the "Glasgow School" movement.
After completing several successful building designs, Mackintosh became an official partner in Honeyman and Keppie in 1904. When economic hardships were causing many architectural practices to close in 1913, he resigned from Honeyman and Keppie and attempted to open his own practice.
Design influences.
Mackintosh lived most of his life in the city of Glasgow. Located on the banks of the River Clyde, during the Industrial Revolution, the city had one of the greatest production centres of heavy engineering and shipbuilding in the world. As the city grew and prospered, a faster response to the high demand for consumer goods and arts was necessary. Industrialized, mass-produced items started to gain popularity. Along with the Industrial Revolution, Asian style and emerging modernist ideas also influenced Mackintosh's designs. When the Japanese isolationist regime softened, they opened themselves to globalisation resulting in notable Japanese influence around the world. Glasgow's link with the eastern country became particularly close with shipyards building at the River Clyde being exposed to Japanese navy and training engineers. Japanese design became more accessible and gained great popularity. In fact, it became so popular and so incessantly appropriated and reproduced by Western artists, that the Western World's fascination and preoccupation with Japanese art gave rise to the new term, "Japonism" or "Japonisme".
This style was admired by Mackintosh because of: its restraint and economy of means rather than ostentatious accumulation; its simple forms and natural materials rather than elaboration and artifice; the use of texture and light and shadow rather than pattern and ornament. In the old western style, furniture was seen as ornament that displayed the wealth of its owner and the value of the piece was established according to the length of time spent creating it. In the Japanese arts furniture and design focused on the quality of the space, which was meant to evoke a calming and organic feeling to the interior.
At the same time a new philosophy concerned with creating functional and practical design was emerging throughout Europe: the so-called "modernist ideas". The main concept of the Modernist movement was to develop innovative ideas and new technology: design concerned with the present and the future, rather than with history and tradition. Heavy ornamentation and inherited styles were discarded. Even though Mackintosh became known as the ‘pioneer’ of the movement, his designs were far removed from the bleak utilitarianism of Modernism. His concern was to build around the needs of people: people seen, not as masses, but as individuals who needed not a machine for living in but a work of art. Mackintosh took his inspiration from his Scottish upbringing and blended them with the flourish of Art Nouveau and the simplicity of Japanese forms.
While working in architecture, Charles Rennie Mackintosh developed his own style: a contrast between strong right angles and floral-inspired decorative motifs with subtle curves, e.g. the Mackintosh Rose motif, along with some references to traditional Scottish architecture. The project that helped make his international reputation was the Glasgow School of Art (1897–1909). During the early stages of the Glasgow School of Art Mackintosh also completed the Queen's Cross Church project in Maryhill, Glasgow. This is considered to be one of Charles Rennie Mackintosh most mysterious projects. It is the only church by the Glasgow born artist to be built and is now the Charles Rennie Mackintosh Society headquarters.
Like his contemporary Frank Lloyd Wright, Mackintosh's architectural designs often included extensive specifications for the detailing, decoration, and furnishing of his buildings. The majority if not all of this detailing and significant contributions to his architectural drawings were designed and detailed by his wife Margaret Macdonald whom Charles had met when they both attended the Glasgow School of Art. His work was shown at the Vienna Secession Exhibition in 1900.
Mackintosh's architectural career was a relatively short one, but of significant quality and impact. All his major commissions were between 1895 and 1906, including designs for private homes, commercial buildings, interior renovations and churches.
Unbuilt designs.
Although moderately popular (for a period) in his native Scotland, most of Mackintosh's more ambitious designs were not built. Designs for various buildings for the 1901 Glasgow International Exhibition were not constructed, neither was his "Haus eines Kunstfreundes" (Art Lover's House) of the same year. He competed in the 1903 design competition for Liverpool Cathedral, but failed to gain a place on the shortlist (the winner was Giles Gilbert Scott).
Other unbuilt Mackintosh designs include:
"The House for An Art Lover (1901)" was built after his death in Bellahouston Park, Glasgow (1989–1996).
"An Artist's Cottage and Studio (1901)", known as "The Artist's Cottage", was completed at Farr by Inverness in 1992. The architect was Robert Hamilton Macintyre acting for Dr and Mrs Peter Tovell. Illustrations can be found on the RCAHMS Canmore site.
The first of the unexecuted "Gate Lodge, Auchinbothie (1901)" sketches was realised as a mirrored pair of gatehouses to either side of the Achnabechan and The Artist's Cottage drives, also at Farr by Inverness. Known as "North House" and "South House", these were completed 1995-7.
Mackintosh's architectural output was small, but he did influence European design. Popular in Austria and Germany, his work received acclaim when it was shown at the Vienna Secession Exhibition in 1900. It was also exhibited in Budapest, Munich, Dresden, Venice and Moscow.
Design work and paintings.
The Four.
Mackintosh, his future wife Margaret MacDonald, her sister Frances MacDonald, and Herbert MacNair met at evening classes at the Glasgow School of Art (see above). They became known as a collaborative group, "The Four", or "The Glasgow Four", and were prominent members of the "Glasgow School" movement. The group exhibited in Glasgow, London and Vienna, and these exhibitions helped establish Mackintosh's reputation. The so-called "Glasgow" style was exhibited in Europe and influenced the Viennese Art Nouveau movement known as Sezessionstil (in English, the Vienna Secession) around 1900. Mackintosh also worked in interior design, furniture, textiles and metalwork. Much of this work combines Mackintosh's own designs with those of his wife, whose flowing, floral style complemented his more formal, rectilinear work.
Later life.
Later in life, disillusioned with architecture, Mackintosh worked largely as a watercolourist, painting numerous landscapes and flower studies (often in collaboration with Margaret, with whose style Mackintosh's own gradually converged). They moved to the Suffolk village of Walberswick in 1914. There Mackintosh was accused of being a German spy and briefly arrested in 1915.
By 1923, the Mackintoshes had moved to Port-Vendres, a Mediterranean coastal town in southern France with a warm climate that was a comparably cheaper location in which to live. Mackintosh had entirely abandoned architecture and design and concentrated on watercolour painting. He was interested in the relationships between man-made and naturally occurring landscapes, and created a large portfolio of architecture and landscape watercolour paintings. Many of his paintings depict Port Vendres, a small port near the Spanish border, and the landscapes of Roussillon. The local Charles Rennie Mackintosh Trail details his time in Port Vendres and shows the paintings and their locations. The couple remained in France for two years, before being forced to return to London in 1927 due to illness.
That year, Charles Rennie Mackintosh was diagnosed with throat and tongue cancer. A brief recovery prompted him to leave the hospital and convalesce at home for a few months. Mackintosh was admitted to a nursing home where he died on 10 December 1928 at the age of 60. He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium in London, his ashes are buried in the grounds (with a marker).
Retrospect.
Mackintosh's designs gained in popularity in the decades following his death. His House for an Art Lover was built in Glasgow's Bellahouston Park in 1996, and the University of Glasgow (which owns most of his watercolour work) rebuilt the interior of a terraced house Mackintosh had designed, and furnished it with his and Margaret's work (it is part of the university's Hunterian Museum). The Glasgow School of Art building (now "The Mackintosh Building") is cited by architectural critics as among the finest buildings in the UK. On 23 May 2014 the building was ravaged by fire. The library was destroyed, but firefighters managed to save the rest of the building.
The Charles Rennie Mackintosh Society encourages greater awareness of the work of Mackintosh as an architect, artist and designer. The rediscovery of Mackintosh as a significant figure in design has been attributed to the designation of Glasgow as European City of Culture in 1990, and exhibition of his work which accompanied the year-long festival. His enduring popularity since has been fuelled by further exhibitions and books and memorabilia which have illustrated aspects of his life and work. The revival of public interest has led to the refurbishment and opening of more buildings to the public, such as the Willow Tea Rooms in Glasgow and 78 Derngate in Northampton. From the 1990s onwards the Scottish artist Stewart Bowman Johnson, who studied in the Mackintosh building at Glasgow School of Art, produced a series of interpretations of the architect's work including works depicting the doors and windows of the Willow tearooms.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City held a major retrospective exhibition of Charles Rennie Mackintosh's works from 21 November 1996 to 16 February 1997. In conjunction with the exhibit were lectures and a symposium by scholars, including Pamela Robertson of the Hunterian Art Gallery, Glasgow art gallery owner Roger Billcliffe, and architect J. Stewart Johnson, and screening of documentary films about Mackintosh.
Charles Rennie Mackintosh was commemorated on a series of banknotes issued by the Clydesdale Bank in 2009; his image appeared on an issue of £100 notes.
In 2012, one of the largest collections of art by Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Glasgow Four Glasgow School was sold at auction in Edinburgh for £1.3m. The sale included work by Mackintosh's sister-in-law Frances Macdonald and her husband Herbert MacNair.
In July 2015 it was announced that Mackintosh's designs for a tearoom would be reconstructed to form a display in Dundee's new V&A museum. Although the original building which housed the tearoom on Glasgow's Ingram Street was demolished in 1971 the interiors had all been dismantled and put into storage.

</doc>
<doc id="54596" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54596" title="Charles Macintosh">
Charles Macintosh

Charles Macintosh FRS (29 December 1766 – 25 July 1843) was a Scottish chemist and inventor of waterproof fabrics. The Mackintosh raincoat (the variant spelling is now standard) is named for him.
Biography.
Macintosh was born in Glasgow, the son of George Macintosh and Mary Moore, and was first employed as a clerk. 
He devoted all his spare time to science, particularly chemistry, and before he was twenty resigned his clerkship to take up the manufacture of chemicals. In this he was highly successful, inventing various new processes. His experiments with one of the by-products of tar, naphtha, led to his invention of waterproof fabrics, the essence of his patent being the cementing of two thicknesses of cloth together with natural (India) rubber, the rubber being made soluble by the action of the naphtha. For his various chemical discoveries he was, in 1823, elected a fellow of the Royal Society.
In 1828, he became a partner with James Beaumont Neilson in a firm to exploit the latter's patent for the hot blast blowing of blast furnaces, which saved considerably on their fuel consumption.
Macintosh married, in 1790, Mary Fisher, daughter of Alexander Fisher a merchant of Glasgow. 
They had one son, George Macintosh (1791-1848)
Charles Macintosh died in 1843 at Dunchattan, Scotland, and was buried in the churchyard of Glasgow Cathedral.
He is buried with his parents in the ground of his great grandfather, John Anderson of Douhill, Lord Provost of Glasgow. His name is added to the impressive 17th century monument which stands against the eastern boundary wall. A secondary memorial also exists (in polished red granite, dating from the late 19th century) slightly to the north, where Charles is again mentioned on the grave of his son George.
External links.
If you need anymore details go to //charlesmacintosh.com
Have Fun!-Wikipedia

</doc>
<doc id="54605" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54605" title="TeachText">
TeachText

The TeachText application is a simple text editor made by Apple Computer bundled with System 7.1 and earlier. It was created by Apple programmer Bryan Stearns with later versions created by Stearns and Francis Stanbach. TeachText was one of the only applications included with the Mac system software, leading to its frequent role as the application to open "ReadMe" files. It was named "TeachText" as a nod to this role in tutorials and other introductory materials.
TeachText was derived from the Edit application, which was a simple text editor for the early pre-System 6 Apple Macintosh computers. Edit was included with early versions of the basic system software to demonstrate the use of the Macintosh user interface. While Edit was a demonstration program for developers, TeachText was used mainly by users to display Read Me documents.
Since the first Macintosh models came with a full-featured word processor, MacWrite, software publishers commonly shipped documentation in its native format. When Apple stopped bundling MacWrite, ownership was transferred to Claris, so developers could not distribute it on their programs' installation floppy disks. With no text program present on the disks, owners without a second floppy disk drive or hard disk could be left with no way to view documentation or installation instructions. Apple supplied TeachText as a small, freely-distributable program to address this need.
TeachText could only operate on a single document at a time and supported only the default text font (12-point Geneva at the time) in the MacRoman encoding, with formatting such as bold, italic and underline. It also included rudimentary support for embedded images; the images were stored in PICT format in the file's resource fork in ascending numbers from zero, instances of non-breaking spaces in the text loaded up the appropriately numbered image, the first instance loading image "0", the second space loading image "1", and so on.
TeachText was automatically associated with all TEXT type codes for files with an unknown Creator code. That is, if a user attempted to open any text file and the original program that created it was not known on the local computer, TeachText would be asked to open the file in its place. In this respect, TeachText was the "default editor" of the Mac system, playing a role similar to Notepad under Microsoft Windows.
The underlying text engine was the TextEdit Manager built into Mac OS. TextEdit had originally been written to support very small runs of editable text, like those found in Save as... dialogs and similar roles. As such, it had been written with a short integer as a length counter, and could thus only handle up to 32 kB of text in a file. This interacted with the "default editor" role when it was sometimes asked to open files much longer that 32k, which resulted in a variety of errors.
TeachText later evolved into SimpleText, and with the arrival of Mac OS X, both were replaced by the TextEdit application derived from OPENSTEP.

</doc>
<doc id="54609" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54609" title="TextEdit">
TextEdit

TextEdit is a simple, open source word processor and text editor, first featured in NeXT's NeXTSTEP and OpenStep. It is now distributed with OS X since Apple Inc.'s acquisition of NeXT, and available as a GNUstep application for other Unix-like operating systems such as Linux. It is powered by Apple Advanced Typography and has many advanced typography features.
Implementation.
TextEdit replaced the text editor of previous Macintosh operating systems, SimpleText. TextEdit uses the Cocoa text system to read and write documents in Rich Text Format (RTF), Rich Text Format Directory, plain text, and HTML formats, and can open (but not save) old SimpleText files. It also has access to the operating system's built-in spell-checking service. The version included in Mac OS X v10.3 added the ability to read and write documents in Word format, and the version in Mac OS X v10.4 added the ability to read and write Word XML documents. The version included in Mac OS X v10.5 added read and write support for Office Open XML and OpenDocument Text. The version included in Mac OS X v10.6 added automatic spelling correction, support for data detectors, and text transformations. The version included in Mac OS X v10.7 added versioning of files, and Autosave similar to iOS.
Formatted text, justification, and even the inclusion of graphics and other multimedia elements are supported by TextEdit, as well as the ability to read and write to different character encodings, including Unicode (UTF-8 and UTF-16). TextEdit automatically adjusts letter spacing in addition to word spacing while justifying text. TextEdit does not support multiple columns of text.
The high-resolution TextEdit 1.5 icon found in Mac OS X versions starting with 10.5 (Leopard) features an extract from Apple's "Think Different" ad campaign. This was replaced by a blank sheet of note paper in 10.10 (Yosemite).
Source code.
Apple distributes TextEdit's source code as part of the documentation of its integrated development environment (IDE) Xcode. On the Internet, the source code of TextEdit can be found in Apple's "Mac Developer Library". The following quote is from the characteristic part of the New BSD-compliant license text included in the source code: 

</doc>
<doc id="54612" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54612" title="RC">
RC

R&C, RC, R/C, Rc, or rc may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="54614" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54614" title="Fashion Police">
Fashion Police

Fashion Police is an American television series that premiered on September 10, 2010, on E!. It was originally hosted by Joan Rivers and featured panelists George Kotsiopoulos, Giuliana Rancic, and Kelly Osbourne commenting on celebrity fashions.
The show returned from a 5 month long hiatus on August 31, 2015 with Melissa Rivers as the new co-host with Giuliana Rancic and Brad Goreski both returning.
The show will return for a sixth season on January 11, 2016, covering the 2016 Golden Globes. Margaret Cho will join as the fourth panelist. On January 6, 2016, it was announced that NeNe Leakes will also being joining the panelists, making it the first time that the show has had five permanent panelists. She will debut during the sixth season premiere.
Background.
In 2010, the series returned to E! with the program running the day after events, rather than airing live from the red carpet. The series became a weekly program on September 10, 2010, where they continue to discuss the dos and don'ts of celebrity fashion. The show started as a half-hour program but expanded to one hour on March 9, 2012.
Rivers died on September 4, 2014; two weeks later, it was announced that the series will continue without her. On December 1, 2014, E! announced that comedian Kathy Griffin will replace Rivers as host starting in January 2015. She will be joined by celebrity fashion stylist Brad Goreski who replaces panelist George Kotsiopoulus. Griffin's debut episode, following the 2015 Golden Globes, was watched by 912,000 viewers. The episode following the 21st Screen Actors Guild Awards, on January 26, 2015, was watched by 686,000 viewers.
Kathy Griffin succeeded Rivers after a three-month hiatus following Rivers' death in September 2014, while Brad Goreski replaced Kotsiopoulos upon its relaunch. Osbourne departed the program in late February 2015 after the February 23rd post-Oscars special show, citing her decision to "pursue other opportunities". Shortly after, Griffin announced her departure from the show in March 2015 after filming only seven episodes.
In March 2015, E! announced that the show would remain on hiatus until September 2015, in order to revamp the series and replace the vacant panelist positions, following the departure of Griffin and Osbourne.
In June 2015, it was announced the series would return on August 31, 2015 and would feature Melissa Rivers as a new co-host and would return for six episodes with both Goreski and Rancic returning, with a search commencing for a fourth panelist. For the sixth season, Margaret Cho and NeNe Leakes joined the panel.
Hosts.
Departures.
In March 2015, Kelly Osbourne departed the program in late February 2015 after the February 23rd post-Oscars special show, citing her decision to "pursue other opportunities". Shortly after, Griffin announced her departure from the show in March 2015 after filming only seven episodes. E! announced that the show would remain on hiatus until September 2015, in order to revamp the series and replace the vacant panelist positions, following the departure of Griffin and Osbourne.
Segments.
Regular segments include:
New segments from March 9, 2012 along with an all-new hour of truth of "Fashion Police":
Criticism.
Writers' wages controversy.
In early April 2013, writers for the show complained to the state of California, alleging that the network was breaking state law by not compensating them for regular wages and overtime. According to the writers, their paychecks state that they worked eight hours each week, regardless of their actual working time. In response to the complaint, the network said "E! values our "Fashion Police" writers and we pay them fairly and in full legal compliance." On April 13, the writers at the show went on strike.
Zendaya controversy.
On February 27, 2015, E! confirmed Osbourne's exit, citing her decision to "pursue other opportunities". However, days earlier, Osbourne had tweeted that she was upset and was questioning whether she would stay with the show, following jokes made by Rancic concerning singer Zendaya, in reference to her hair smelling of "patchouli oil" and "weed" at the 87th Academy Awards. She also tweeted: "you guys do realize that @Zendaya is my friend right?". On March 12, 2015, it was announced that Griffin would also be departing the series after only seven episodes. Griffin cited that she felt her style of humor "did not fit well" with the series' creative direction. The network announced in March 2015 their decision to keep the series on hiatus until September 2015, in order to revamp the series with new panelists.

</doc>
<doc id="54615" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54615" title="Tricon">
Tricon

Tricon may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="54626" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54626" title="Lysander">
Lysander

Lysander ( or ; died 395 BCE, , "Lýsandros") was a Spartan admiral who commanded the Spartan fleet in the Hellespont which defeated the Athenians at Aegospotami in 405 BCE. The following year, he was able to force the Athenians to capitulate, bringing the Peloponnesian War to an end; he organized the dominion of Sparta over Greece in the last decade of his life.
Early life.
Little is known of Lysander's early life. Lysander's father was Aristocleitus, who was a member of the Spartan Heracleidae; that is, like most Dorian men of good family, he claimed descent from Heracles. Nevertheless, Lysander was a mothax: his family was poor and he showed himself obedient and conformable. He had a manly spirit and showed himself superior to pleasure. When he was young he needed sponsorship to be able to participate in the Spartan training to be a soldier.
Character.
Lysander endured well through poverty and was never greatly affected by wealth even though he filled Sparta with riches and the love of them. after the Athenian war he imported much gold and silver to Sparta but did not take any for himself, in war he was cunning, deceitful, and chose to use whatever information he thought would be convenient. When some thought that the descendants of Hercules should not use deceit, he laughed at them and said "For where the lion's skin will not reach, you must patch it out with the fox's." 
The Battle of Notium.
Lysander was appointed Spartan navarch (admiral) for the Aegean Sea in 407 BC. It was during this period that he gained the friendship and support of Cyrus the Younger, a son of Darius II of Persia and Parysatis.
Lysander then undertook the major project of creating a strong Spartan fleet based at Ephesus which could take on the Athenians and their allies.
Alcibiades was appointed commander-in-chief with autocratic powers of the Athenian forces and left for Samos to rejoin his fleet and try and engage Lysander in battle. The Spartan navarch Lysander refused to be lured out of Ephesus to do battle with Alcibiades. However, while Alcibiades was away seeking supplies, the Athenian squadron was placed under the command of Antiochus, his helmsman. During this time Lysander managed to engage the Athenian fleet and they were routed by the Spartan fleet (with the help of the Persians under Cyrus) at the Battle of Notium in 406 BC. This defeat by Lysander gave the enemies of Alcibiades the excuse they needed to strip him of his command. He never returned again to Athens. He sailed north to the land he owned in the Thracian Chersonese.
Lysander out of office.
However, Lysander ceased to be the Spartan navarch after this victory and, in accordance with the Spartan law, was replaced by Callicratidas. Callicratidas' ability to continue the war at sea was neatly sabotaged when Lysander returned all the donated funds to Cyrus when he left office.
In 406 BC, Callicratidas assembled a fleet and sailed to Methymna, Lesbos, which he then besieged. This move threatened the Athenian grain supply. Athens sent their admiral, Conon, to relieve the siege. When Callicratidas attacked him, Conon retreated to Mytilene, where he was blockaded by Callicratidas’ Spartan fleet.
To relieve Conon, the Athenians assembled a new fleet composed largely of newly constructed ships manned by inexperienced crews. While this fleet was inferior to the Spartans, the Athenians employed new and unorthodox tactics, which allowed them to secure a dramatic and unexpected victory in the Battle of Arginusae, near Lesbos. The blockade of Conon by the Spartans was broken, the Spartan force was soundly defeated and Callicratidas was killed during the battle.
Lysander returns to command.
After Sparta was severely defeated at the Battle of Arginusae and with the death of the Spartan navarch, Callicratidas, Sparta's allies sought to have Lysander reappointed as navarch. However, Spartan law did not allow the reappointment of a previous navarch, so Aracus was appointed as navarch with Lysander as his deputy. Nonetheless, Lysander was effectively the commander of the Spartan fleet. Cyrus, being especially pleased, once again started to supply the Spartan fleet with funds - even allowing Lysander to run his satrapy in his absence.
Once back in command, Lysander directed the Spartan fleet towards the Hellespont. The Athenian fleet followed him there. In 404 BC, the Athenians gathered their remaining ships at Aegospotami (near the Thracian Chersonese). The Athenian fleet under Admiral Conon was then destroyed by the Spartans under Lysander in the Battle of Aegospotami. Conon withdrew to Cyprus.
Then, Lysander's forces went to the Bosporus and captured both Byzantium and Chalcedon. They expelled the Athenians living in those States. Lysander also captured Lesbos Island.
The defeat of Athens.
Following the victory at Aegospotami, the Spartans were in a position to finally force Athens to capitulate. The Spartan king, Pausanias, laid siege to Athens while Lysander's fleet blockaded the port city of Piraeus. This action effectively closed the grain route to Athens through the Hellespont, thereby starving Athens. Realising the seriousness of the situation, Theramenes started negotiations with Lysander. These negotiations took three months, but in the end Lysander agreed to terms at Piraeus. An agreement was reached for the capitulation of Athens and the cessation of the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC.
The Spartans required the Athenians to raze the walls of Piraeus as well as the Long Walls which connected Athens and Piraeus; that the Athenians should abandon their colonies, and that Athens should surrender all but twelve of their ships to the Spartans. However, Theramenes did secure terms that saved the city of Athens from destruction. Greek towns across the Aegean Sea in Ionia were again to be subject to the Achaemenid Empire.
Lysander in Command in Athens.
Lysander then put in place a puppet government in Athens with the establishment of the oligarchy of the Thirty Tyrants under Critias which included Theramenes as a leading member. The puppet government executed a number of citizens and deprived all but a few of their former rights as citizens of Athens. Many of Athens' former allies were now ruled by boards of ten (decarchy), often reinforced with garrisons under a Spartan commander (called a "harmost"). The practice started the period of Spartan hegemony.
After storming and seizing Samos, Lysander returned to Sparta. Alcibiades, the former Athenian leader, emerged after the Spartan victory at Aegospotami and took refuge in Phrygia, northwestern Asia Minor with Pharnabazus, its Persian satrap. He sought Persian assistance for the Athenians. However, the Spartans decided that Alcibiades must be removed and Lysander, with the help of Pharnabazus, arranged the assassination of Alcibiades.
Lysander was able to gain a huge fortune from his victories against the Athenians and their allies. Nonetheless, in accord with Spartan tradition, he wished to transfer this fortune to the ephors at Sparta. Lysander commanded the Spartan general Gylippus to undertake this task. However, Gylippus could not resist the temptation to enrich himself and stole a significant amount. When it was discovered what had happened, Gylippus went into exile and was condemned to death in his absence.
Resistance by Athens.
The Athenian general Thrasybulus, who had been exiled from Athens by the Spartans' puppet government, led the democratic resistance to the new oligarchic government. In 403 BC, he commanded a small force of exiles that invaded Attica and, in successive battles, defeated first a Spartan garrison and then the forces of the oligarchic government (which included the Spartan general, Lysander) in the Battle of Munychia. The leader of the Thirty Tyrants, Critias, was killed in the battle.
The Battle of Piraeus was then fought between Athenian exiles who had defeated the government of the Thirty Tyrants and occupied Piraeus and a Spartan force sent to combat them. In the battle, the Spartans narrowly defeated the exiles, with both sides suffering large numbers of casualties. Despite opposition from Lysander, after the battle Pausanias the Agiad King of Sparta, arranged a settlement between the two parties which allowed the reunification of Athens and Piraeus, and the re-establishment of democratic government in Athens. The remaining oligarchic Thirty Tyrants were allowed to flee to Eleusis. Thrasybulus restored democratic institutions to Athens and granted amnesties to all except the oligarchic extremists.
Involvement in Cyrus' revolt against the Persian King Artaxerxes II.
During 401 BC Lysander still had a continuing influence in Sparta despite his setbacks in Athens. He was able to persuade the Spartans to select Agesilaus II as the new Eurypontid Spartan king following the death of Agis II. He was also able to persuade the Spartans to support Cyrus the Younger in his unsuccessful rebellion against his older brother, Artaxerxes II of Persia.
Cyrus started out with about 20,000 men, of whom around 10,000 were Greek mercenaries, including Spartans. When he reached the Euphrates River at Thapsacus, he announced that he was marching against Artaxerxes II. He advanced unopposed into Babylonia; but Artaxerxes II, warned at the last moment by Tissaphernes, hastily gathered an army.
The two forces met at the Battle of Cunaxa, north of Babylon, where Cyrus was slain. The Greek mercenaries fighting for Cyrus were left stranded after Cyrus’ defeat. They fought their way north through hostile Persians, Armenians, and Medians to Trapezus, on the coast of the Black Sea under Xenophon. Xenophon was an Athenian who became their leader when Tissaphernes, Persian satrap of Caria and Lydia, had Clearchus of Sparta and the other senior Greek captains captured and executed by Artaxerxes.
Xenophon's men made their way back to Greece, with most of the men enlisting with the Spartan Army. Xenophon's successful march through the Achaemenid Empire encouraged Sparta to turn on the Persians and begin a series of wars against the Persians in Asia Minor.
Lysander's final years.
Hoping to restore the juntas of oligarchic partisans that he had put in place after the defeat of the Athenians in 404 BC, Lysander arranged for Agesilaus II, the Eurypontid Spartan king, to take command of the Greeks against Persia in 396 BC. The Spartans had been called on by the Ionians to assist them against the Persian King Artaxerxes II. Lysander was arguably hoping to receive command of the Spartan forces not joining the campaign. However, Agesilaus II had become resentful of Lysander's power and influence. So Agesilaus II frustrated the plans of his former mentor and left Lysander in command of the troops in the Hellespont, far from Sparta and mainland Greece.
Back in Sparta by 395 BC, Lysander was instrumental in starting a war with Thebes and other Greek cities, which came to be known as the Corinthian War. The Spartans prepared to send out an army against this new alliance of Athens, Thebes, Corinth and Argos (with the backing of the Achaemenid Empire) and ordered Agesilaus II to return to Greece. Agesilaus set out for Sparta with his troops, crossing the Hellespont and marching west through Thrace.
Death.
The Spartans arranged for two armies, one under Lysander and the other under Pausanias of Sparta, to rendezvous at and attack the city of Haliartus, Boeotia. Lysander arrived before Pausanias and persuaded the city of Orchomenus to revolt from the Boeotian confederacy. He then advanced to Haliartus with his troops. In the Battle of Haliartus, Lysander was killed after bringing his forces too near the walls of the city.
Following his death, an abortive scheme by Lysander to increase his power by making the Spartan kingships collective and that the Spartan king should not automatically be given the leadership of the army, was "discovered" by Agesilaus II.
There is argument amongst historians as to whether this was an invention to discredit Lysander after his death. However, in the view of Nigel Kennell, the plot fits with what we know of Lysander.
Lysander remains an ambiguous figure. While the Roman biographer Cornelius Nepos charges him with "cruelty and perfidy", Lysander – according to Xenophon – nonetheless spared the population of captured Greek poleis such as Lampsacus, perhaps in order to gain a useful reputation for mildness.
Cult.
According to Duris of Samos, Lysander was the first Greek to whom the cities erected altars and sacrificed to him as to a god and the Samians voted that their festival of Hera should be called Lysandreia.

</doc>
<doc id="54630" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54630" title="Tina Arena">
Tina Arena

Filippina Lydia "Tina" Arena (born 1 November 1967) is an Australian singer-songwriter, musical theatre actress, and record producer. During her career she has lived in Australia, United States, France, and the United Kingdom. Arena is one of Australia's highest selling female artists who, as of July 2014, has sold over 10 million records worldwide.
Arena is an artist with the vocal range of a soprano and is multilingual: she sings live and records in English, Italian and French, as well as in Spanish. In April 2013 she was voted Australia's all-time greatest female singer and third greatest singer overall in an industry poll conducted by music journalist, Cameron Adams, for the "Herald Sun".
Arena has earned several international and national awards, including seven ARIA Awards, and two World Music Awards for 'Best-selling Australian Artist', which she received in 1996 and in 2000.
In 2009, Arena became the first Australian to be awarded the Knighthood of the Order of National Merit – presented by the President of the French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy, for her contributions to French culture, and ceremoniously awarded by Frédéric Mitterrand, the Minister of Culture and Communication of France.
In 2012, Arena appeared as a judge and mentor on the revival of the Australian television variety programme "Young Talent Time": the original "Young Talent Time" series had made her a household name in the 1970s and 1980s, as Tiny Tina, which screened on Network Ten from 1971 to 1988.
In October 2013, Arena released her first English album of original material in eleven years, titled "Reset". In the same month, Arena published her first autobiography, titled "Now I Can Dance", which is now in its fourth reprint.
Also in 2013, Arena participated in the 13th Australian series of "Dancing with the Stars", reaching third place behind Cosentino and Rhiannon Fish respectively.
From 28 September 2015, Tina Arena can be heard hosting shows on SmoothFM Radio Stations from 4.00pm every Saturday on Sydney’s SmoothFM 93.5 and on Melbourne’s SmoothFM 91.5. [http://www.smoothfm.com.au/article/tina-arena-returns-smoothfm]
In October 2015, Arena released her 11th studio album, "Eleven" which became her seventh Top 10 album in Australia by debuting at No. 2 on the ARIA album chart.
In November 2015, Arena was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame at the 2015 ARIA Awards ceremony.
On 'Australia Day' - 26 January 2016 - Arena has been recognised in the Australia Day honors, which the country's sovereign awards its citizens for actions or deeds that benefit the nation. Arena has been appointed as a 'Member in the General Division of the Order Of Australia' - Order of Australia - in recognition of her contribution to the arts, representing Australia on the world stage and philanthropic work.
On 27 April 2016, the Governor General of Australia, Sir Peter Cosgrove, awarded Tina Arena with her Order of Australia (AM) Medal at a private ceremony in Paris.
Life and career.
1967–87: Early life and career beginnings.
Arena was born to Giuseppe "Joe" Arena and Francesca "Franca" Catalfamo (both from Valguarnera, Sicily), Italian immigrants, in Melbourne on 1 November 1967. Giuseppe was a rural worker in Italy, and then a cane cutter in Cairns in 1955. By the following year he was a labourer in Melbourne and later worked for Victorian Railways. Arena grew up in Moonee Ponds with two sisters, Nancy and Silvana; her family calls her Pina which provided her stage name, Tina. For secondary schooling she attended St. Columba's College, Essendon from 1980 and completed Year 12 in 1985. She later recalled her upbringing "It was a very Italian household, it was a very traditional household. There was a lot of love but there was a lot of discipline. And there was no room for pretentiousness. Really, there just wasn't."
As a child Arena listened to Spanish, Italian and French songs that were in her family's record collection. At five she was the flower girl at her cousin Gaetano's wedding, and at the reception she urged her father to approach the host so that she could sing – Daryl Braithwaite's version of "You're My World" – it was her first public performance. She received singing lessons from Voila Ritchie who recommended her to appear on a TV talent quest and variety show, "Young Talent Time". Initially appearing as a contestant Arena became Tiny Tina, a regular member of the show's Young Talent Team in 1976. For her first appearance she sang ABBA's "Ring Ring".
As a member of the team Arena performed cover versions of popular tracks and in 1977 released a split album, "Tiny Tina and Little John", alternating tracks with fellow team member, John Bowles. While with the TV series she appeared in TV specials, at shopping centres or tourist venues. In September 1982 she became a "coach" for new team members, Danielle Minogue and Mark McCormack; Arena told "The Australian Women's Weekly"s Debbie Byrne that "They seem to be settling down a lot quicker than I did. They both have a really professional attitude." At 14, she told Byrne "my aim: to be a recording artist and actress but, now, I have to concentrate simply on what I'm doing and that can take enough effort."
Arena left the show in October 1983 ahead of her 16th birthday – the program's stipulation to give way for younger members – performing "The Way We Were" and "McArthur Park" for her finale. She completed her Higher School Certificate (final year of secondary school) and was hired as an insurance clerk but resigned after three months to pursue a music career.
At the age of 17, Arena signed a record deal with Graffiti Records, which released her debut single, "Turn Up the Beat", in 1985. Australian musicologist, Ian McFarlane, described it as having a "dance-pop" style. "The Sydney Morning Herald"s Tim Elliott reflected that it "failed to impress." It had been recorded in the previous year with Brian Cadd producing at Flagstaff Studios in Melbourne. When the single did not appear in the top 50 her planned album was scrapped.
Arena sang advertisement jingles and worked on the pub and club circuit. She performed solo shows and in bands, including as a member of a nine-piece ensemble, Network. She also appeared in musicals. In 1987 she supported American artist, Lionel Richie on his Australian tour, following a number of charity performances.
1988–93: Debut solo album – "Strong as Steel".
During 1988 Arena appeared as a guest on Australian TV shows recalling her tenure on "Young Talent Time" and looking for a new record label. In 1990 she had a singing and dancing role in the David Atkins' musical, "Dynamite", for a 10-month run. Also that year she signed with EMI and reinvented her image as a raunchy disco diva. In May she issued a single, "I Need Your Body", which peaked at No. 3 on the ARIA Singles Chart. McFarlane described it as "uptempo" with the associated music video "projecting a raunchy disco-diva persona... flaunting a pouting rock starlet with bouncing cleavage and attitude to burn." Australian journalist, Ed Nimmervoll, noticed that she used "raunchy videos showing off her cleavage as if to prove she was a woman now."
The artist followed with another single, "The Machine's Breaking Down", in August 1990, which peaked in the top 30. Her debut solo album, "Strong as Steel", was released in October, which peaked at number 17 on the ARIA Albums Chart. Most of the album was produced by Ross Inglis. Penelope Layland of "The Canberra Times" opined that "the frantic single, 'I Need Your Body', is quite uncharacteristic of much of the music on Tina Arena's album, "Strong As Steel". In fact it is one of the weakest tracks on an album which bounces with potential pop hits."
According to Nimmervoll, Arena "was not comfortable. This was not her. This was not what she wanted to be for the rest of her life. Tina went into seclusion while she decided what to do next, moving to Los Angeles to be a nobody again." She had relocated to LA in 1991 where she took more singing lessons and started song writing. Upon return to Australia, in 1993, she performed in the local musical theatre production, "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat", as the Narrator.
1994–96: Second solo album – "Don't Ask".
Tina Arena's second solo studio album, "Don't Ask", was released on 21 November 1994 and was produced by David Tyson for Columbia Records. According to Nimmervoll during recording "Tina nearly broke down. This was an all-important moment in her career." Arena co-wrote all ten tracks of the original Australian version. She recalled, "I had gotten used to singing other people's songs, but this time they are my songs and my experience so I can sing them like I mean it. The record is honest and sincere and simple."
McFarlane noticed it demonstrated a "more mature, sophisticated, soul-tinged style and approach... her powerful, crystal clear voice more than adequately matched the material on offer." Kelvin Hayes of AllMusic felt that "a lot of "Don't Ask" remains twee. However, there are good moments." It peaked at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart – a year after its release – and remained in the top 50 for 83 weeks. It reached No. 11 on the UK Albums Chart and No. 12 in New Zealand.
"Don't Ask" was the highest-selling album of 1995 in Australia and one of the biggest-selling albums by an Australian female singer to date. It has sold over two million copies worldwide and was certified 10 times platinum by ARIA in 2011 for shipment of over 700,000 copies in that country alone. The success of the record made her a "priority artist" for Sony, who marketed her in the US. Her European success was realised: "Don't Ask" charted in Germany, Sweden and Switzerland.
The lead single, "Chains", was issued ahead of the album in September 1994 in Australia, which peaked at No. 4 on the ARIA Singles Chart. It also reached No. 6 in the UK, No. 7 in New Zealand, No. 9 in Ireland and No. 20 in Canada. In 1995 she toured Europe, appearing on "Top of the Pops", which broadcast to an audience of 60 million people. In the European market Arena was an unknown and a fresh commodity, she opined: "I loved every minute of that – of people not knowing who I was. I guess it was tiring fighting the individual thing. It was good to not be a part of a past and being accepted as an artist. Not having to carry this "Young Talent Time" luggage which was constantly shoved in my face." Five additional singles were released, "Sorrento Moon (I Remember)" (February 1995), "Heaven Help My Heart" (May), "Wasn't It Good" (September), "Show Me Heaven" (November) and "That's the Way a Woman Feels" (March 1996).
At the ARIA Music Awards of 1995 Arena was nominated in six categories and won four trophies: Best Pop Release and Song of the Year for "Chains"; and Album of the Year and Best Female Artist for "Don't Ask". At the 1996 ceremony she received five more nominations and won Highest Selling Album for "Don't Ask". Other accolades she earned were Variety Club Entertainer of the Year, an Advance Australia Foundation award, and a World Music Award.
1997–2000: "In Deep" and Sydney Olympic Games.
Arena relocated to Los Angeles in 1996 and 1997 to record her third solo studio album, "In Deep" (18 August 1997), which became her second number-one album in Australia. For the Australian version of the album Arena co-wrote eleven of its twelve tracks – her fellow writers include Mick Jones (of Foreigner), David Tyson, Christopher Ward, Dean McTaggart, Pam Reswick and Steve Werfel. The album included her cover version of Foreigner's "I Want to Know What Love Is", originally written by Jones who produced Arena's version. "In Deep" "was recorded predominantly live in the studio in an attempt to bring the material closer to Tina's stage performance persona" with four tracks produced by Tyson and the rest by Jones. "In Deep" was certified 3× platinum in Australia. William Ruhlmann of AllMusic found the US version of the album showed that "Her own songs, co-written with a team of others, are perfectly good contemporary pop/rock, and she sings them with passionate commitment" and it was "brimming with potential hit singles (it spawned three in Australia)."
"In Deep", in its different versions, provided ten singles, with the lead one, "Burn", appearing in July 1997, which had some US airplay. The track was co-written by Arena with Reswick and Werfel. In Australian it debuted at No. 2 and was certified gold upon its release. It was also a hit in Asia. Besides the English language version she also recorded it in Spanish and Italian (in the form of "Ti Voglio Qui"). The second single, "If I Didn't Love You" (November) appeared in the ARIA top 50. In April of the following year she issued "Now I Can Dance", which peaked at No. 13. In the UK Arena released "Whistle Down the Wind" (June 1998) as a cover version single, it was the title track from the 1996 musical of the same name, her version reached the UK Singles Chart top 30.
Arena's duet with US artist, Marc Anthony, "I Want to Spend My Lifetime Loving You", from the feature film soundtrack for "The Mask of Zorro" (July 1998), gave her European chart success. The track was issued as a non-album single in Australia in September, but did not reached the top 50. It was included on the French release version of "In Deep", appearing in October, which peaked at No. 3 on the French Albums Chart – a year after its first entry – and spent 88 weeks on that chart. It also reached the top 10 in Belgium and top 40 in Switzerland. It was certified 3× platinum by Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique (SNEP) in May 2001 for sales in France. "I Want to Spend My Lifetime Loving You" had been issued in Europe in September 1998, it peaked at No. 3 in France – her first charting single in that market. It also reached No. 3 in the Netherlands and top 10 in Belgium.
She toured the US from March 1999 to promote the album's local release, as well as another single, "If I Was a River", which did peak in the UK top 40. Sony attempted to "break" Arena into the US market by the release of "If I Was a River", penned by Diane Warren. Ruhlmann felt the label had an "obvious plan is to turn her into a down-under Celine Dion" however the album and its singles "had no commercial impact upon release in the U.S." and "must be considered a disappointment." Her US foray included appearances on TV shows such as "Donny & Marie". In February 1999 she teamed with label-mate Donna Summer to perform a cover version of "No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)"; the duet appeared on Summer's live album, "Live & More Encore" (June 1999).
Arena's first French language single, "Aller plus haut" (English: "Go Higher", July 1999), appeared on the continental version of "In Deep", which peaked at No. 2 on the local singles chart; it has sold 600,000 copies in that country. It also became her first number-one hit on the Belgian Singles Chart. Her second French language single was a cover version of "Les trois cloches" (English: "The Three Bells", January 2000), which reached No. 4 in France and another number-one hit in Belgium. From May that year she lived in London while she appeared in the lead role of Esméralda for the stage musical, "Notre Dame de Paris" during a six-month run. Carr, by now her ex-husband, had claimed in "Business Review Weekly" (2000) that Arena was paid $200,000 per week when she was performing in "Notre Dame de Paris".
Arena sang "The Flame" (written by John Foreman) at the 2000 Opening Ceremony of the Sydney Olympics on 15 September. Seven Network covered the national broadcast across Australia, which become the highest rating TV telecast in Australian history. John Farnham, Olivia Newton-John, Vanessa Amorosi, Human Nature and Julie Anthony were some of the other Australian artists who appeared at the opening ceremony and contributed to the various artists' album, "" (September 2000). She recalled, "When I sang at the Olympics, I cared about the fact that I was Australian. And I was touched because I was an ethnic girl, of ethnic blood but that WAS Australian. Because I was born here, this is where I grew up, this is where I learned everything."
At the ARIA Music Awards of 2000 in October the singer-songwriter received an Outstanding Achievement Award. In the following month she issued her first compilation album, "Souvenirs", which reached the ARIA top 40.
2001–07: "Just Me", "Never (Past Tense)" and "Un autre univers".
Arena's fourth solo studio album, "Just Me", was released on 12 November 2001 and debuted at No. 7 in Australia; it reached the top 50 in France and top 70 in Switzerland. She co-wrote tracks with Nile Rodgers (Madonna, Diana Ross), Desmond Child (Ricky Martin, Aerosmith), Robbie Nevil (Earth, Wind & Fire), Mark Hudson (Eric Clapton, Cher), Victoria Shaw and Peter-John Vettese (Dido, Paul McCartney). The album explored different genres, containing more upbeat tracks as opposed to her two previous studio records which featured her soprano voice on slow pop ballads. Although written after the divorce from Carr, she said that the record is not angry nor bitter but rather a "celebration of womanhood". It was certified gold by ARIA and by SNEP (France).
To promote "Just Me" she showcased it for 150 people, mostly Australian TV and media personalities, in Melbourne. The record provided four singles including, "Symphony of Life" (September 2002), which peaked at No. 8 in Australia and top 50 (as "Symphonie de l'âme") in France. In November 2008 she performed the track at the closing of the Gay Games, when the international sporting event was held in Sydney. She was featured on "2" (November 2002), a duets album from Olivia Newton-John for which the pair recorded an uptempo track, "I'll Come Runnin'".
In March 2002 Arena posed for a semi-nude photo shoot by James Houston for "Black+White" magazine. She explained, "This shoot isn't about shock value, and it's not porn, it's an elegant, understated and honest exercise in challenging my sexuality and learning to love myself again." She appeared in "Cabaret" in August that year in Sydney in the lead role of Sally Bowles.
In April 2003 Arena and US electronica group, Roc Project, released a dance music single "Never (Past Tense)", which reached No. 1 on the US "Billboard" dance top 10. The single included seven house and electronic dance music remixed versions by various DJs. This was the first time three performers associated with "Young Talent Time" were simultaneously in the chart's Top 10 with Dannii Minogue's "I Begin to Wonder" and Kylie Minogue's "Slow" also appearing on the chart.
"Never (Past Tense)" was used on the US TV series, "Queer as Folk", and on its associated soundtrack album (2003). The singer-songwriter performed the Tiësto remix with a new remix of "Dare You to Be Happy" live at the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras after party in March 2005. By 2014 she had performed at the Mardi Gras for a fourth time: she is one of the gay icons of this generation.
In October 2004 Arena released "Greatest Hits 1994–2004", her second compilation album, which peaked at No. 10 in Australia. The compilation provided a newly recorded track as a single, "Italian Love Song" (November), which reached the top 40. After its release she left the recording label, striking a new deal with Sony Music BMG, France. She embarked on an Australian national tour in late 2004 to early 2005 to support the album.
Her debut French language album, "Un autre univers" was released in December 2005 and gained a platinum certificate from SNEP in February 2006, it reached No. 9 on the French charts and remained for 78 weeks. It provided a single, "Aimer jusqu'à l'impossible" which peaked at No. 3 on the French charts and stayed in the top 5 for over 10 weeks. The single peaked at No. 1 in Belgium and was a top 20 hit in Switzerland. The song received an award for Song of the Year in France. A second single "Je m'appelle Bagdad" was released in June 2006, peaking at No. 6 in France and No. 8 in Belgium. The third and final single from the album, "Tu aurais dû me dire (Oser parler d'amour)" (English: "You Should Have Told Me (Dare to Speak of Love)"), was issued in October.
Arena toured France, including two concerts at the Théâtre de la Porte Saint-Martin in Paris. She performed her French hits and some of her Australian repertoire. In July she appeared on "The Footy Show" where she performed, with fellow Australian singer Kane Alexander, direct from Munich's Prince Regent's Theatre.
In 2006 she appeared on various European TV shows to promote the album and has appeared in Night of the Proms, "Star Academy", Fête de la Musique, Les Enfoirés and the NRJ Music Awards where she performed her single, "Aimer jusqu'à l'impossible" (English: "Love Even the Impossible", November 2005) backed by her French contemporaries: Anggun, Leslie Bourgoin, Amel Bent, Nâdiya, Lââm and Natasha St-Pier.
2007–09: "Songs of Love & Loss" 1 and 2.
Arena returned to the London stage in April 2007, starring as Roxie Hart in the West End production of "Chicago". Her sixth studio album, "Songs of Love & Loss", was recorded independently and self-financed as she no longer had a recording contract in Australia. It was issued on 1 December 2007 after a new deal was struck with EMI. It has torch songs, originally recorded by women in the 1960s and 1970s, including by Dusty Springfield and Diana Ross, and the arrangements featured a full string orchestra conducted by Simon Hale. A promotional tour of Australia, in early November, included appearances on "Dancing with the Stars" and "Sunrise". Five concert dates backed by a 35-piece orchestra were held over December to January: three at the Sydney Opera House and two at Melbourne's Hamer Hall. The album peaked at No. 3 on the ARIA Albums Chart; at the ARIA Music Awards of 2008 it was nominated for Best Selling Album.
While Arena was promoting "Songs of Love & Loss" in Australia, she shot a music video in and around Sydney for her next French language single, "Entends-tu le monde?" (English: "Do you hear the world?"), was made available to French radio and music TV channels. It appeared on her second French language album, "7 vies" (28 January 2008), which debuted at No. 12 on the official French charts, her highest debut in the country. "Entends-tu le monde?" was physically released in February and debuted at No. 10 on the French charts, becoming her sixth top 10 single in that market.
In August 2008 Arena performed with Andrea Bocelli during his Australian tour. The two performed duets of "The Prayer", "Canto della Terra" and a cover of Elvis Presley's "Can't Help Falling in Love". Prior to the tour she had been in the UK recording her eighth studio album, "Songs of Love & Loss 2", it was released on 15 November 2008, which reached No. 12 in Australia. For this album, her vocals were recorded live with the London Studio Orchestra, again conducted by Hale. On 27 August 2008, alongside fellow Australian singer and songwriter Darren Hayes, Arena appeared as a guest judge during the London auditions of the sixth season of "Australian Idol". She appeared again as a guest judge, on 16 November, while she was in Australia to promote, "Songs of Love & Loss 2".
In March 2009 Arena toured Australia and appeared as a guest performer at the Sydney Gay & Lesbian Mardi Gras party singing a medley of "Aimer jusqu'à l'impossible" and "No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)", accompanied by Alison Jiear on the latter. She travelled to South Australia to co-headline with US musician, Chris Isaak, at Barossa Under the Stars, an outdoors concert. Also in March 2009 her first French language compilation album, "The Best & le meilleur" (English: "The Best & the best"), was released. "The Peel Me Sessions", an album of original material recorded in 2003, was also officially released in May 2009.
2010–12: "Young Talent Time" revival and Australian symphony orchestra tour.
In January 2010 Arena and Irish singer, Ronan Keating (of Boyzone), were co-headliners for an outdoor concert festival, A Day on the Green, at Swan Valley. They performed tracks from their latest respective albums and were supported by "Australian Idol" season 4 winner, Damien Leith.
A live CD and DVD was released in Australia in January 2010, "", where the album peaked at No. 22 on the ARIA Albums Chart. The live recording was her eighth Top 10 album on the ARIA Australian-only Artist Chart and was also promoted and sold during Arena and Keating's concerts.
On 24 July 2011 Arena sang, in a remarkable a cappella performance, the Australian National Anthem on the podium on the Avenue des Champs-Élysées of the Tour de France after the victory by Australian cyclist, Cadel Evans. This was unscheduled and came about because Arena was living in Paris at the time and offered her services only hours before the ceremony. It was the first time in Tour history that a national anthem was performed live on the podium in front of huge crowds and a broadcast audience of millions.
In 2011 she was a judge on the French version of "The Sing-Off".
Arean appeared as a judge on the 2012 version of "Young Talent Time" in Australia, 29 years after her final regular appearance on the original series. After judging the talent shows, she finished her national Australian tour backed by various Australian symphony orchestras with Anthony Callea as a special guest. Arena detailed working on the tour: "They are precious, those moments where the orchestra swells behind you, they are difficult to describe in words and from an adrenalin perspective it is a sensational feeling." In November 2012 she issued her fourth live album released on CD and DVD, "Symphony of Life", recorded at one of her Melbourne concerts. Arena's management is Beebox.
2013–14: "Reset", "Now I Can Dance" and "Dancing with the Stars Australia".
Due to the success of her Symphony of Life Tour, Arena added five extra shows in Melbourne, Sydney and Canberra for February and March 2013 as part of her Encore Concerts. In July she performed two concerts at the Queensland Music Festival. One of these was a solo show backed by the Queensland Youth Orchestra performing her own hits and covers; and the other was with local artists, Christine Anu, Anthony Callea, Rick Price and Katie Noonan paying tribute to the Bee Gees.
She released her first English language solo studio album in eleven years, "Reset", on 18 October 2013, which peaked at No. 4 and became her sixth Top 10 album in Australia. It was released in both standard and a deluxe editions (with three extra tracks). It was certified gold in three weeks and then platinum in December 2013. Its lead single, "You Set Fire to My Life" (September), included both studio and acoustic versions; as well as three official remixes by Cosmic Dawn, The Slips and 7th Heaven – it reached the ARIA top 40. The track "Only Lonely" featured in Channel 7's "Home and Away" promo, which also reached the top 40. Also in October 2013 Arena published her autobiography, "Now I Can Dance", written with Jude McGee, to coincide with the release of "Reset" and is now on its 4th reprint.
Arena performed at G'Day USA Los Angeles Black Tie Gala on 11 January 2014. On 14 March she appeared on "Sunrise" and performed "You Set Fire to My Life". Also in March the singer-songwriter appeared on "So You Think You Can Dance Australia" to perform her single, "Reset All" (December 2013), which was accompanied by a routine from two previous winners of the series, Jack Chambers and Talia Fowler.
2015–present: "Eleven".
In May 2015 Arena issued "Songs of Love & Loss" in France. Her eleventh studio album, "Eleven" was released on 30 October 2015. It was preceded in September by its lead single, "I Want to Love You". She premiered that track on "Dancing with the Stars" on 4 September. On 25 October 2015 ARIA announced that Arena was due to be inducted into their Hall of Fame in the annual awards ceremony in November. Arena told Cameron Adams of News Corp Australia that "was still yet to decide if she will perform at the event, and has no clue who will induct her... 'I'd like it to be someone who knows me. I haven't written a speech yet. I'm not sure if I will. I feel I need to speak from the heart." In mid-November ARIA announced that she would be inducted by Kylie Minogue, also a Hall of Fame inductee and the sister of Dannii Minogue, a former "Young Talent Time" contestant.
Artistry.
Arena possesses the vocal range of a soprano. She is multilingual: she speaks and sings in English, Italian and French; and also sings in Spanish. Her singing style is characterised as between R&B and ballad.
Numerous media and musical contemporaries have praised Arena's skill as a world-class singer. Music journalist Ed Nimmervoll said that she "has a voice that can give you goosebumps", while news journalist Kate de Brito says that it is "smooth and musical even when she talks." Cameron Adams of the "Herald Sun" says she has a "beautiful voice telling a beautiful story." William Yeoman of "The West Australian" commented that "Arena's voice is redolent of both youthful pop and mature cabaret." Limelight Magazine says, "Tina Arena is a performer with a supreme voice, boundless range and energy, and charm to spare." Kelsey Munro of "The Sydney Morning Herald" says that her voice is "strong, smooth and pitch-perfect." According to Heidi Maier of Tom Magazine, it can be described as "remarkably strong". She also said, "Tina Arena has a powerhouse voice and when she hits her marks, she hits them with forcefulness and verve." Spiritworks Australia says, "Whether she's singing spine-tingling renditions of contemporary classics by Lulu, Dusty Springfield or Blondie or her self-penned hits Sorrento Moon, Chains or Burn, Tina Arena is acclaimed as one of the world's most versatile and magnificent vocal interpreters. Her voice is smooth, rich and streaming with emotion."
The Queensland Music Festival team says, "Tina sparkles with vivacity and class, possessing an outstanding vocal range and a voice that belies her petite stature – endlessly powerful and always resonant with heart and honesty." Queensland Music Festival artistic director, James Morrison said "Tina Arena has one of the most amazing voices I've ever heard." Time Out magazine had a brief description of Tina's voice as it says, "Tina Arena truly boasts two incredible assets - her voice and her versatility..." Melbourne's 89.9 Light FM declared that Arena is "undisputedly one of Australia's finest voices". Sharyn Hamey, an online music reviewer says that "Arena has an angelic, beautiful and a powerful voice."
Fellow Australian celebrities have praised Arena's vocal prowess with Delta Goodrem saying, "Her voice has strength whilst keeping its feminine warmth to draw you in." Melbourne singer/songwriter, Michael Paynter hailed Arena as "simultaneously the most natural and supernatural female Australian voice ever. She is technically and emotionally perfect, but somehow always has enough of a sniff of imperfection and rawness to make you not only believe every word, but be hanging off them too." Ricki-Lee Coulter also says that "She has so much control and power". Missy Higgins also commented that, "Tina Arena is one of our best singers ever. She could sing the balls off anyone, and she's miniature." Brian Mannix says, "Tina Arena has a tasteful voice. She sells the lyrics with her big voice but never over-sings." Birds of Tokyo frontman says, "Tina Arena can sing the shit out of anything, and do it in four different languages!" Anthony Callea added, "Technically, she is faultless and her tone is unique and warm. I love that she goes against all the 'singers' rules' – I've seen what she eats and drinks before a gig!" Darren Hayes also made an effort in letting the public know that Arena's voice is one of his favourite voices in Australia through Twitter.
Arena's musical influences include Barbra Streisand, Carole King, Dusty Springfield, Petula Clark, Aretha Franklin and various Italian singers. She also admitted that in a non-musical perspective, Princess Diana inspired her and called her "a great role model for women".
Legacy.
Arena's tracks have been covered by country music artists, including Wynonna Judd ("Heaven Help My Heart", "Love's Funny That Way"), Jo Dee Messina ("Burn"), Pam Tillis ("If I Didn't Love You"), Terri Clark ("Unsung Hero"), Kellie Coffey, Kathie Baillie ("Love's Funny That Way") and LeAnn Rimes ("You Made Me Find Myself").
Younger artists have covered Tina's songs in singing competitions as well, such as the winner of the second season of Australian Idol, Casey Donovan who recorded Arena's "Symphony of Life" for her album "For You" and both Filipino artist Sarah Geronimo and Australian Anthony Callea who admits to be a fan of Arena's, recorded "I Want to Know What Love Is" including the bridge that was written specifically for Arena's version. Sarah De Bono who came in at fourth place when she joined "The Voice Australia" also recorded Arena's ("If I Didn't Love You"). Filipino artists Nina and Christian Bautista recorded a duet version of "Burn" that appeared on Nina's album "Nina Live!" while Regine Velasquez did a live performance on Philippine television. Erik Santos and Sheryn Regis also recorded their version of Arena and Marc Anthony's duet, "I Want to Spend My Lifetime Loving You".
In 2001, Arena was awarded a BMI Songwriting Award (Broadcast Music Inc.) by the American performance rights organisation for co-writing "Burn" with Pam Reswick and Steve Werfel. http://bmi.com/awards/
In April 2013 Arena was voted Australia's all-time greatest female singer and third greatest singer overall in an industry poll conducted by Australian music journalist, Cameron Adams, for the "Herald Sun". As of July 2014 she has sold over 10 million records worldwide.
In November 2015, Arena was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame at the 2015 ARIA Awards ceremony.
On 'Australia Day' - 26 January 2016 - Arena has been recognised in the Australia Day honors, which the country's sovereign awards its citizens for actions or deeds that benefit the nation. Arena has been appointed as a 'Member in the General Division of the Order Of Australia' - Order of Australia - in recognition of her contribution to the arts, representing Australia on the world stage and philanthropic work.
Personal life.
In December 1995 Arena married her then-manager, Ralph Carr; they divorced in 1999 and settled their financial and contractual matters in February 2002. According to Alexandra Carlton, in October 2015, "the marriage left her feeling 'disconnected' and unhappy, and began with Carr's anger over her refusal to allow their wedding photos to be sold to a magazine, and culminated in an antagonistic divorce that she's since described as a 'shitfight'. They don't speak today, but Arena says she doesn't regret the relationship. 'What you gonna do? Worry about the mistakes, wrong decisions?' she scoffs. 'At the end of the day, you were meant to make those. You do your greatest growing through the pain'."
Arena and French artist Vincent Mancini (sometimes credited as Vincent Hare) began dating in 2000; the couple have a son. During her career she has lived in Australia, United States, France and the United Kingdom.
Autobiography.
Arena's autobiography, "Now I Can Dance", published by HarperCollins, was released on 14 October 2013 in paperback and E-book format. It is billed by HarperCollins as "Honest and intimate, funny and frank, "Now I Can Dance" is the long-awaited memoir from the very special, much-loved singer, songwriter and pop diva, Tina Arena." She told Kathy McCabe of News Corp Australia that "I don't need to put a book out to put food on the table. It started to dawn on me in the last year that I have had an unbelievable life and I want people to know it's been hilarious, there's been a lot of laughter in my journey."
Charities.
Arena supports non-profit charities, including, in 2013, as an official patron for a charitable organisation, Soldier On, which assists mentally and physically wounded Australian soldiers. The singer said: "It's vital that Australian soldiers have access to support when they return from overseas, and 'Soldier On' will make a much needed difference in the lives of wounded veterans and their families. 'Soldier On' is the first charity of its kind in Australia and I am honoured to be a Patron."
In July 2013 she performed at the Melbourne Asbestos Cancer Fundraiser, which donated funds raised to support Mesothelioma research undertaken at the Olivia-Newton John Cancer & Wellness Centre and the Austin Hospital, Melbourne. She was also a participant, with partner Damian Whitewood, in the 13th Australian season of "Dancing with the Stars" which commenced in September 2013 and nominated Barnardos Australia as her charity; the pair finished in third place.
Arena took part in Australia's biggest TV charity appeal, Telethon, in Perth on 20 October 2013. On 21 December 2013 she opened Sydney's annual Carols in the Domain concert with "O Come, All Ye Faithful" and performed her single "Reset All" at the closing of the event.
In November 2014 Arena released a cover version of the 10cc's 1976 song, "The Things We Do For Love", with money raised going towards the National Breast Cancer Foundation.
Television.
List of some notable TV appearances Arena has made over the years.
Awards.
Arena has won several awards, including seven ARIA Awards and the World Music Award for best-selling Australian artist, which she received in both 1996 and 2000. In 2009 she was awarded the Knighthood of the Order of National Merit by the President of the French Republic, Nicolas Sarkozy, for her contributions to French culture. She is the first Australian to have received that order of state. In November 2015 she was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame at the annual awards ceremony.

</doc>
<doc id="54631" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54631" title="Saturday">
Saturday

Saturday is the day of the week following Friday and preceding Sunday. Saturday is the seventh and therefore last day of the week according to many commonly used calendars, and it is the second-to-last (sixth) day of the week according to ISO 8601 (see below). The Romans named Saturday "Sāturni diēs" ("Saturn's Day") no later than the 2nd century for the planet Saturn, which controlled the first hour of that day, according to Vettius Valens. The day's name was introduced into West Germanic languages and is recorded in the Low German languages such as Middle Low German "sater(s)dach", Middle Dutch "saterdag" (Modern Dutch "zaterdag") and Old English "Sætern(es)dæġ" and "Sæterdæġ". However, the name was selected as a calque of the god Saturn, after whom the planet was named. The day was also referred to as "Sæternes dæġe" in an Old English translation of Bede's "Ecclesiastical History of the English People". In Old English, Saturday was also known as "sunnanæfen" ("sun" + "eve" cf. dialectal German "Sonnabend"). 
Origins in antiquity.
Between the 1st and 3rd centuries AD, the Roman Empire gradually replaced the eight-day Roman nundinal cycle with the seven-day week. The astrological order of the days was explained by Vettius Valens and Dio Cassius (and Chaucer gave the same explanation in his "Treatise on the Astrolabe"). According to these authors, it was a principle of astrology that the heavenly bodies presided, in succession, over the hours of the day. The association of the weekdays with the respective deities is thus indirect, the days are named for the planets, which were in turn named for the deities.
The Germanic peoples adapted the system introduced by the Romans but glossed their indigenous gods over the Roman deities in a process known as "interpretatio germanica". In the case of Saturday, however, the Roman name was borrowed directly by Westgermanic peoples, apparently because none of the Germanic gods were considered to be counterparts of the Roman god Saturn. Otherwise Old Norse and Old High German did not borrow the name of the Roman god (Icelandic "laugardagur", German "Samstag").
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Saturdays are days on which the Theotokos (Mother of God) and All Saints are commemorated, and the day on which prayers for the dead are especially offered, in remembrance that it was on a Saturday that Jesus lay dead in the tomb. The Octoechos contains hymns on these themes, arranged in an eight-week cycle, that are chanted on Saturdays throughout the year. At the end of services on Saturday, the dismissal begins with the words: "May Christ our True God, through the intercessions of his most-pure Mother, of the holy, glorious and right victorious Martyrs, of our reverend and God-bearing Fathers…". For the Orthodox, Saturday — with the sole exception of Holy Saturday — is never a strict fast day. When a Saturday falls during one of the fasting seasons (Great Lent, Nativity Fast, Apostles' Fast, Dormition Fast) the fasting rules are always lessened to an extent. The Great Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross and the Beheading of St. John the Baptist are normally observed as strict fast days, but if they fall on a Saturday or Sunday, the fast is lessened.
Saturday Sabbath.
For Jews, Messianics, Seventh Day Baptists and Seventh-day Adventists, the seventh day of the week, known as Shabbat (or Sabbath for Seventh-day Aventists), stretches from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday and is the day of rest. Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches distinguish between Saturday (Sabbath) and the Lord's Day (Sunday). Other Protestant groups, such as Seventh-day Adventists, hold that the Lord's Day is the Sabbath and not Sunday. From Scriptures, Jesus rested in the grave on the Sabbath day, which is the day after the day of preparation. In this way, Jesus rested as God did in the beginning during the creation. Quakers traditionally refer to Saturday as "Seventh Day", eschewing the "pagan" origin of the name. In Islamic countries, Fridays are considered as the last day of the week and are holidays along with Thursdays; Saturday is called "Sabt" (cognate to Sabbath) and it is the first day of the week in many Arab countries.
Name and associations in European cultures.
In Scandinavian countries, Saturday is called "lördag," "lørdag," or "laurdag," the name being derived from the old word "laugr/laug" (hence Icelandic name "Laugardagur"), meaning bath, thus "Lördag" equates to bath-day. This is due to the Viking practice of bathing on Saturdays. The roots "lör", "laugar" and so forth are cognate to the English word "lye", in the sense of detergent.
Today, Saturday is officially called "Samstag" in all German-speaking countries, but there it has two names in modern Standard German. "Samstag" is always used in Austria, Liechtenstein, and the German-speaking part of Switzerland, and generally used in southern and western Germany. It derives from Old High German "sambaztac", which itself derives from Greek "Σάββατο", and this Greek word derives from Hebrew "שבת" (Shabbat). However, the current German word for Sabbath is "Sabbat". The second name for Saturday in German is "Sonnabend", which derives from Old High German "sunnunaband", and is closely related to the Old English word "sunnanæfen". It means literally "Sun eve", i.e., "The day before Sunday". "Sonnabend" is generally used in northern and eastern Germany, and was also the official name for Saturday in East Germany.
In West Frisian there are also two words for Saturday. In Wood Frisian it is " saterdei" and in Clay Frisian it is "sneon", derived from "snjoen", a combination of Old Frisian "sunne", meaning "sun" and "joen", meaning eve.
In the Westphalian dialects of Low Saxon, in East Frisian Low Saxon and in the Saterland Frisian language, Saturday is called "Satertag", also akin to Dutch "Zaterdag", which has the same linguistic roots as the English word "Saturday". It was formerly thought that the English name referred to a deity named "Sætere" who was venerated by the pre-Christian peoples of north-western Germany, some of whom were the ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons. Sætere was identified as either a god associated with the harvest of possible Slav origin, or another name for Loki a complex deity associated with both good and evil; this latter suggestion may be due to Jacob Grimm. However, modern dictionaries derive the name from "Saturn".
Outside Europe.
The modern Maori name for Saturday, "rahoroi", literally means "washing-day" - a vestige of early colonized life when Māori converts would set aside time on the Saturday to wash their whites for Church on Sunday. A common alternative Māori name for Saturday is the transliteration "Hatarei".
In Japanese, the word Saturday is 土曜日(do youbi), meaning 'soil day' and is associated with 土星 (dosei): Saturn (the planet), literally meaning "soil star". Similarly, in Korean the word Saturday is 토요일 (tho yo il), also meaning soil day.
In India, Saturday is Shanivar, based on Shani, the Vedic god manifested in the planet Saturn. In the Thai solar calendar of Thailand, the day is named from the Pali word for Saturn, and the color associated with Saturday is purple. In Pakistan, Saturday is Hafta, meaning the week.
Position in the week.
The international standard ISO 8601 sets Saturday as the sixth day of the week. The three Abrahamic religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam) regard Saturday as the seventh day of the week. As a result, many refused the ISO 8601 standards and continue to use Saturday as their seventh day.
Astrology.
In astrology, Saturday is aligned by the planet Saturn, it's planet's symbol , and the astrological signs of Capricorn and Aquarius.

</doc>
<doc id="54632" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54632" title="Friday">
Friday

Friday is the day after Thursday and precedes Saturday. In countries adopting "Monday-first" conventions as recommended by the international standard ISO 8601, it is the fifth day of the week. It is the sixth day in countries that adopt a "Sunday-first" convention.
In other countries (see workweek and weekend), Friday is the first day of the week-end, with Saturday the second. In Afghanistan and Iran, Friday is the last day of the week-end, with Saturday as the first day of the working week. Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates (U.A.E.) and Kuwait also followed this convention until they changed to a Friday–Saturday week-end, on September first, 2006 in Bahrain and the U.A.E., and a year later in Kuwait. In Iran, Friday is the only week-end day. In Saudi Arabia and the Maldives, there are two week-ends where Friday is the first week-end of the week while Saturday is the second week-end.
Etymology.
The name "Friday" comes from the Old English "Frīġedæġ," meaning the "day of Frige", a result of an old convention associating the Old English goddess Frigg with the Roman goddess Venus, with whom the day is associated in many different cultures. The same holds for "Frīatag" in Old High German, "Freitag" in Modern German, and "vrijdag" in Dutch. 
The expected cognate name in Old Norse would be "*friggjar-dagr". However, the name of Friday in Old Norse is "frjá-dagr" instead, indicating a loan of the week-day names from Low German.
The modern Scandinavian form is "Fredag" in Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish, meaning Freyja's day. The distinction between Freyja and Frigg in some Germanic mythologies is problematic.
The word for Friday in most Romance languages is derived from Latin "dies Veneris" or "day of Venus" (a translation of Greek "Aphrodites hemera"), such as "vendredi" in French, "venerdì" in Italian, "viernes" in Spanish, "divendres" in Catalan, "vennari" in Corsican, and "vineri" in Romanian. This is also reflected in the p-Celtic Welsh language as "dydd Gwener". An exception is Portuguese, also a Romance language, which uses the word "sexta-feira" meaning "sixth day of liturgical celebration", derived from the Latin "feria sexta" used in religious texts where it was not allowed to consecrate days to pagan gods.
Sardinian "chenàpura" figures as an exception among all the other Romance languages, since it is derived from Latin "cena pura". This name had been given by the Jewish community exiled to the island in order to designate the food specifically prepared for Shabbat eve.
In modern Greek, four of the words for the week-days are derived from ordinals. However, the Greek word for Friday is Paraskevi (Παρασκευή) and is derived from a word meaning "to prepare" (παρασκευάζω). Like Saturday (Savvato, Σάββατο) and Sunday (Kyriaki, Κυριακή), Friday is named for its liturgical significance as the day of preparation before Sabbath, which was inherited by Greek Christian Orthodox culture from Jewish practices.
Most Slavic languages call Friday the "fifth (day)": Belarusian "пятніца – pyatnitsa", Bulgarian "петък – petŭk", Czech "pátek", Polish "piątek", Russian "пятница – pyatnitsa", Serbian "петак – petak", Croatian "petak", Slovene "petek", Slovak "piatok", and Ukrainian "п'ятниця – p'yatnitsya". The Hungarian word "péntek" is a loan from some Slavic language from the time when it still had the sound in the word.
In Arabic, Friday is الجمعة "al-jum`ah", from a root meaning "congregation/gathering." In languages of Islamic countries outside the Arab world, the word for Friday is commonly a derivation of this: (Indonesian "jumat", Malay "jumaat", Turkish "cuma", Persian "جمعه").
In most of the Indian languages, Friday is "Shukravar" (or a derived variation of Sukravar), named for Shukra, the Sanskrit name of the planet Venus.
In Japanese, is formed from the words meaning Venus (lit. gold + planet) and meaning day (of the week).
In the Korean language, it is 금요일 in Korean Hangul writing (Romanization: "geumyoil"), as is pronounced of the written word 金曜日 in Chinese characters, as in Japanese.
In the Nahuatl language, Friday is () meaning "day of Quetzalcoatl".
Folklore.
Friday is considered unlucky in some cultures. This is particularly so in maritime circles; perhaps the most enduring sailing superstition is that it is unlucky to begin a voyage on a Friday. In the 19th century, Admiral William Henry Smyth described Friday in his nautical lexicon "The Sailor's Word-Book" as:
("Dies Infaustus" means "unlucky day".) This superstition is the root of the well-known urban legend of .
In modern times, Friday the 13th is considered to be especially unlucky, due to the conjunction of Friday with the unlucky number thirteen. Such a Friday may be called a "Black Friday".
However, this superstition is not universal, notably in Scottish Gaelic culture:
In astrology, Friday is connected with the planet Venus. It is also connected with the Astrological signs Libra and Taurus.
Religious observances.
In Islam, Friday (from sun-down Thursday to sun-down Friday, simpler than midnight to midnight in a pre-clock age) corresponds as a holy day to Sunday in Christianity and Saturday (Friday evening to Saturday evening) in Judaism and Sabbatarian Christianity. Friday observance includes attendance at a mosque for congregation prayer or Salat AlJumu'ah. It is considered a day of peace and mercy (see Jumu'ah) as well as a day of rest.
According to some Islamic traditions, the day is stated to be the original holy day ordained by Allah, but that now Jews and Christians recognize the days after. In some Islamic countries, the week begins on Sunday and ends on Saturday, just like the Jewish week and the week in some Christian countries. The week begins on Saturday and ends on Friday in most other Islamic countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Somalia, and Iran. Friday is also the day of rest in the Bahá'í Faith. In some Malaysian states, Friday is made as the first week-end, with Saturday as the second week-end to allow Muslims to perform their religious obligations on Friday in a more peaceful manner. Sunday is the first working day of the week for governmental organisations. 
In Christianity, Good Friday is the Friday before Easter. It commemorates the crucifixion of Jesus.
Traditionally, Roman Catholics were obliged to refrain from eating the meat of land animals on Fridays, although fish was allowed. However, episcopal conferences are now authorized to allow some other form of penance to replace abstinence from meat. Many still choose the traditional form of Friday penance.
The 1983 Code of Canon Law states:
Some Anglicans (particularly Anglo-Catholics) also practice abstinence from meat either on all Fridays or on Fridays in Lent. More generally, traditional Anglican Prayer Books prescribe weekly Friday abstinence for all Anglicans.
The Eastern Orthodox Church continues to observe Fridays (as well as Wednesdays) as fast days throughout the year (with the exception of several fast-free periods during the year). Fasting on Fridays entails abstinence from meat or meat products (i.e., quadrupeds), poultry, and dairy products (as well as fish). Unless a feast day occurs on a Friday, the Orthodox also abstain from using oil in their cooking and from alcoholic beverages (there is some debate over whether abstention from oil involves all cooking oil or only olive oil). On particularly important feast days, fish may also be permitted. For the Orthodox, Fridays throughout the year commemorate the Crucifixion of Christ and the Theotokos (Mother of God), especially as she stood by the foot of the cross. There are hymns in the Octoekhos which reflect this liturgically. These include "Theotokia" (hymns to the Mother of God) which are chanted on Wednesdays and Fridays called "Stavrotheotokia" ("Cross-Theotokia"). The dismissal at the end of services on Fridays begins with the words: "May Christ our true God, through the power of the precious and life-giving cross..."
Quakers traditionally refer to Friday as "Sixth Day," eschewing the pagan origins of the name. In Slavic countries, it is called "Fifth Day" (Polish , Russian – "pyatnitsa").
In Hinduism, special observances are practiced for goddesses, mainly for Durga and Lakshmi on Friday.
Jewish Sabbath begins at sunset on Friday and lasts until nightfall on Saturday.
There is a Jewish custom to fast on the Friday of the week of Chukat.
In Thailand, the color associated with Friday is blue (see Thai Solar calendar).
Astrology.
Friday is associated with the planet Venus and symbolized by that planet's symbol ♀.

</doc>
<doc id="54633" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54633" title="Thursday">
Thursday

Thursday is the day of the week following Wednesday and before Friday. According to the ISO 8601 international standard adopted in most western countries, it is the fourth day of the week. In countries that use the "Sunday-first" convention, Thursday is defined as the fifth day of the week. 
It is the fifth day of the week in the Judeo-Christian liturgical calendar.
Name.
"See Names of the days of the week for more on naming conventions. "
Thor's (Jupiter's) day.
The name is derived from Old English "Þūnresdæg" and Middle English "Thuresday" (with loss of -n-, first in northern dialects, from influence of Old Norse "Þorsdagr") meaning "Thor's Day". "Thunor, Donar" (German, "Donnerstag") and "Thor" are derived from the name of the Germanic god of thunder, "Thunraz", equivalent to Jupiter in the "interpretatio romana".
In most Romance languages, the day is named after the Roman god Jupiter, who was the god of sky and thunder. In Latin, the day was known as "Iovis Dies", "Jupiter's Day". In Latin, the genitive or possessive case of Jupiter was "Iovis"/"Jovis" and thus in most Romance languages it became the word for Thursday: Italian "giovedì", Spanish "jueves", French "jeudi", Sardinian jòvia, Catalan "dijous", and Romanian "joi". This is also reflected in the p-Celtic Welsh "dydd Iau".
The astrological and astronomical sign of the planet Jupiter (♃) is sometimes used to represent Thursday.
Since the Roman god Jupiter was identified with Thunor (Norse Thor in northern Europe), most Germanic languages name the day after this god: "Torsdag" in Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish, "Hósdagur"/"Tórsdagur" in Faroese, "Donnerstag" in German or "Donderdag" in Dutch. Finnish and Northern Sami, both non-Germanic (Uralic) languages, uses the borrowing "Torstai" and "Duorastat". In the extinct Polabian Slavic language, it was "perundan", Perun being the Slavic equivalent of Thor.
There are a number of modern names imitating the naming of Thursday after an equivalent of "Jupiter" in local tradition. 
In most of the languages of India, the word for Thursday is "Guruvara" – "vara" meaning day and "guru" being the style for Bṛhaspati, guru to the gods and regent of the planet Jupiter. In Thai, the word is "Wan Pharuehatsabodi" – referring to the Hindu deity Bṛhaspati, also associated with Jupiter.
En was an old Illyrian deity and in his honor in the Albanian language Thursday is called "Enjte".
In the Nahuatl language, Thursday is () meaning "day of Tezcatlipoca".
Fourth day.
In Slavic languages and in Chinese, this day's name is "fourth" (Slovak "štvrtok", Czech "čtvrtek", Slovene "četrtek", Croatian and Bosnian "četvrtak", Polish "czwartek", Russian "четверг" "četverg", Bulgarian "четвъртък", Serbian "четвртак", Macedonian "четврток", Ukrainian "четвер" "chetver".). Hungarian uses a Slavic loanword "csütörtök". In Chinese, it's 星期四 "xīngqīsì" ("fourth solar day"). In ancient Chinese, it is 木曜日. In Estonian it's "neljapäev", meaning fourth day or fourth day in a week.
Fifth day.
Greek uses a number for this day: Πέμπτη "Pémpti" "fifth," as does "fifth day," Hebrew: "יום חמישי" ("Yom Hamishi" - day fifth) often written 'יום ה ("Yom Hey" - 5th letter Hey day), and Arabic: "يوم الخميس" ("Yom al-Khamīs" - fifth day). 
In Catholic liturgy, Thursday is referred to in Latin as "feria quinta".
Portuguese, unlike other Romance languages, uses the word "quinta-feira," meaning "fifth day of liturgical celebration", that comes from the Latin "feria quinta" used in religious texts where it was not allowed to consecrate days to pagan gods.
Icelandic also uses the term "fifth day" ("Fimmtudagur").
Quakers traditionally refer to Thursday as "Fifth Day" eschewing the pagan origin of the English name "Thursday".
Cultural practices.
Christian holidays.
In the Christian tradition, Maundy Thursday or Holy Thursday is the Thursday before Easter — the day on which the Last Supper occurred. Also known as "Sheer Thursday" in the United Kingdom, it is traditionally a day of cleaning and giving out Maundy money there. Holy Thursday is part of Holy Week.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church. Thursdays are dedicated to the Apostles and Saint Nicholas. The Octoechos contains hymns on these themes, arranged in an eight-week cycle, that are chanted on Thursdays throughout the year. At the end of Divine Services on Thursday, the dismissal begins with the words: "May Christ our True God, through the intercessions of his most-pure Mother, of the holy, glorious and all-laudable Apostles, of our Father among the saints Nicholas, Archbishop of Myra in Lycia, the Wonder-worker…"
Ascension Thursday is 40 days after Easter, when Christ ascended into Heaven.
In the United States, Thanksgiving Day is an annual festival celebrated on the fourth Thursday in November.
Judaism.
In Judaism, Thursdays are considered auspicious days for fasting. The Didache warned early Christians not to fast on Thursdays to avoid Judaizing, and suggested Fridays instead.
In Judaism the Torah is read in public on Thursday mornings, and special penitential prayers are said on Thursday, unless there is a special occasion for happiness which cancels them.
Thailand.
In Buddhist Thailand Thursday is considered the "Teacher's Day", and it is believed that one should begin one's education on this auspicious day. Thai students still pay homages to their teachers in specific ceremony always held on a selected Thursday. And graduation day in Thai universities, which can vary depending on each university, almost always will be held on a Thursday.
In the Thai solar calendar, the colour associated with Thursday is orange.
Conventional weekly events.
In Australia, most cinema movies premieres are held on Thursdays. Also, most Australians are paid on a Thursday, either weekly or fortnightly. Shopping malls see this as an opportunity to open longer than usual, generally until 9 pm, as most pay cheques are cleared by Thursday morning.
In Norway, Thursday has also traditionally been the day when most shops and malls are open later than on the other weekdays, although the majority of shopping malls now are open until 8 pm or 9 pm every weekday.
In the USSR of the 1970s and 1980s Thursday was the "Fish Day" (, "Rybny den"), when the nation's foodservice establishments were supposed to serve fish (rather than meat) dishes.
For college and university students, Thursday is sometimes referred to as the new Friday. There are often fewer or sometimes no classes on Fridays and more opportunities to hold parties on Thursday night and sleep in on Friday. As a consequence, some call Thursday "thirstday" or "thirsty Thursday".
Elections in the United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, all general elections since 1935 have been held on a Thursday, and this has become a tradition, although not a requirement of the law — which merely states that an election may be held on any day ""except Saturdays, Sundays, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Good Friday, bank holidays in any part of the United Kingdom and any day appointed for public thanksgiving and mourning.""
Additionally, local elections are usually held on the first Thursday in May.
The Electoral Administration Act 2006 removed Maundy Thursday as an excluded day on the electoral timetable, therefore an election can now be held on Maundy Thursday; prior to this elections were sometimes scheduled on the Tuesday before as an alternative.
Academic results.
Both GCSE and A Level results (for the summer exam period) are traditionally given to students on a Thursday, A Level results day is usually the third Thursday of August whilst GCSE results day is a week later.
Astrology.
Thursday is aligned by the planet Jupiter and the astrological signs of Pisces and Sagittarius.

</doc>
<doc id="54634" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54634" title="Wednesday">
Wednesday

Wednesday is the day of the week following Tuesday and before Thursday. According to international standard ISO 8601 adopted in most western countries it is the third day of the week. In countries that use the "Sunday-first" convention Wednesday is defined as the fourth day of the week. It is the fourth day of the week in the Judeo-Christian calendar as well, and was defined so in the ancient Mesopotamian and biblical calendars. The name is derived from Old English "Wōdnesdæg" and Middle English "Wednesdei", "day of Woden", ultimately a calque of "dies Mercurii" "day of Mercury".
Wednesday is in the middle of the common Western five-day workweek that starts on Monday and finishes on Friday.
Etymology.
The name Wednesday continues Middle English "Wednesdei". Old English still had "wōdnesdæg", which would be continued as "*Wodnesday" (but Old Frisian has an attested "wednesdei").
By the early 13th century, the "i"-mutated form was introduced unetymologically.
The name is a calque of the Latin "dies Mercurii" "day of Mercury", reflecting the fact that the Germanic god Woden (Wodanaz or Odin) during the Roman era was interpreted as "Germanic Mercury".
The Latin name dates to the late 2nd or early 3rd century. It is a calque of Greek , a term first attested, together with the system of naming the seven weekdays after the seven classical planets, in the "Anthologiarum" by Vettius Valens (ca. AD 170).
The Latin name is reflected directly in the weekday name in Romance languages: "Mércuris" (Sardinian), "mercredi" (French), "mercoledì" (Italian), "miércoles" (Spanish), "miercuri" (Romanian), "dimecres" (Catalan), "Marcuri" or "Mercuri" (Corsican), "dies Mercurii" (Latin).
The German name for the day, "Mittwoch" (literally: "mid-week"), replaced the former name "Wodenstag" ("Wodan's day") in the tenth century.
The Dutch name for the day, "woensdag" has the same etymology as English "Wednesday", it comes from Middle Dutch "wodenesdag, woedensdag" ("Wodan's day").
Most Slavic languages follow this pattern and use derivations of "the middle" (Bulgarian сряда "sryada", Croatian "srijeda", Czech "středa", Macedonian среда "sreda", Polish "środa", Russian среда "sredá", Serbian среда/"sreda" or cриједа/"srijeda", Slovak "streda", Slovene "sreda", Ukrainian середа "sereda"). The Finnish name is "Keskiviikko" ("middle of the week"), as is the Icelandic name: "Miðvikudagur", and the Faroese name: "Mikudagur" ("Mid-week day"). Some dialects of Faroese have "Ónsdagur", though, which shares etymology with Wednesday. Danish, Norwegian, Swedish Onsdag, ("Ons-dag" = Oden's/Odin's dag/day). In Welsh it is Dydd Mercher, meaning Mercury's Day.
In Japanese, the word Wednesday is 水曜日(sui youbi), meaning 'water day' and is associated with 水星 (suisei): Mercury (the planet), literally meaning "water star". Similarly, in Korean the word Wednesday is 수요일 (su yo il), also meaning water day.
In most of the languages of India, the word for Wednesday is Budhavãra—vãra meaning day and Budh being the planet Mercury.
From Armenian (Չորեքշաբթի—chorekshabti), Georgian (ოთხშაბათი—otkhshabati), and Tajik (Chorshanbiyev) languages the word literally means as "four (days) from Saturday".
Portuguese uses the word "quarta-feira", meaning "fourth day", while in Greek the word is "Tetarti" (Τετάρτη) meaning simply "fourth". Similarly, Arabic أربعاء means "fourth", Hebrew רביעי means "fourth", and Persian چهارشنبه means "fourth day". Yet the name for the day in Estonian "kolmapäev", Lithuanian "trečiadienis", and Latvian "trešdiena" means "third day" while in Mandarin Chinese 星期三 ("xīngqīsān"), means "day three", as Sunday is unnumbered.
Religious observances.
The Creation narrative in the Hebrew Bible places the creation of the Sun and Moon on "the fourth day" of the divine workweek.
Quakers traditionally refer to Wednesday as "Fourth Day" to avoid the pagan associations that exist with the name "Wednesday" or in keeping with the practice of treating each day as equally divine.
The Eastern Orthodox Church observes Wednesday (as well as Friday) as a fast day throughout the year (with the exception of several fast-free periods during the year). Fasting on Wednesday and Fridays entails abstinence from meat or meat products (i.e., four-footed animals), poultry and dairy products. Unless a feast day occurs on a Friday, the Orthodox also abstain from fish, from using oil in their cooking and from alcoholic beverages (there is some debate over whether abstention from oil involves all cooking oil or only olive oil). For the Orthodox, Wednesdays and Fridays throughout the year commemorate the betrayal of Jesus (Wednesday) and the Crucifixion of Christ (Friday). There are hymns in the Octoekhos which reflect this liturgically. These include special "Theotokia" (hymns to the Mother of God) called "Stavrotheotokia" ("Cross-Theotokia"). The dismissal at the end of services on Wednesday begins with these words: "May Christ our true God, through the power of the precious and life-giving cross..."
In Irish and Scottish Gaelic, the name for Wednesday also refers to fasting, as it is "Dé Céadaoin" in Irish Gaelic and "Di-Ciadain" in Scottish Gaelic, which comes from "chéad", "first" and "aoine", "fasting" which means "first day of fasting".
In American culture many Catholic and Protestant churches and some Jewish synagogues schedule study or prayer meetings on Wednesday nights. The sports calendar in many American public schools reflects this, reserving Mondays and Thursdays for girls' games and Tuesdays and Fridays for boys' games while generally avoiding events on Wednesday evening.
Cultural usage.
In Hindu mythology, Budha is the god of Mercury (planet), mid-week Wednesday, and of Merchants and merchandise. According to the Thai solar calendar, the color associated with Wednesday is green.
In the folk rhyme "Wednesday's child is full of woe", reciting the days of the week, Solomon Grundy was 'Married on Wednesday.' In "Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day", the disagreeable nature of the weather is attributed to it being "Winds-Day" (a play on "Wednesday"). In Richard Brautigan's "In Watermelon Sugar" Wednesday is the day when the sun shines grey. Wednesday Friday Addams is a member of the fictional family The Addams Family. Her name is derived from the idea that Wednesday's child is full of woe. Additionally, Wednesday sometimes appears as a character's name in literary works. These include "Thursday's fictions" by Richard James Allen and Neil Gaiman's novel "American Gods". In the 1945 John Steinbeck novel "Sweet Thursday", the titular day is preceded by "Lousy Wednesday".
Wednesday is sometimes informally referred to as "hump day" in North America, a reference to the fact that Wednesday is the middle day—or "hump"—of a typical work week.
Astrology.
The astrological sign of the planet Mercury, ☿, represents Wednesday—"Dies Mercurii" to the Romans, it had similar names in Latin-derived languages, such as the Italian "mercoledì" ("dì" means "day"), the French "mercredi", and the Spanish "miércoles". In English, this became "Woden's Day", since the Roman god Mercury was identified by Woden in northern Europe and it is especially aligned by the astrological signs of Gemini and Virgo. But Wednesday is one of the 3 only days aside from Neptune and Pluto to be associated by another planet, which is Uranus

</doc>
<doc id="54635" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54635" title="Tuesday">
Tuesday

Tuesday is a day of the week occurring after Monday and before Wednesday. According to some commonly used calendars (esp. in the US), it is the third day of the week. According to international standard ISO 8601, however, it is the second day of the week. The English name is derived from Old English "Tiwesdæg" and Middle English "Tewesday," meaning "Tīw's Day", the day of Tiw or Týr, the god of single combat, victory and heroic glory in Norse mythology. Tiw was equated with Mars in the interpretatio germanica, and the name of the day is a translation of Latin "dies Martis".
Etymology.
The name "Tuesday" derives from the Old English "Tiwesdæg" and literally means "Tiw's Day". Tiw is the Old English form of the Proto-Germanic god "*Tîwaz", or Týr in Norse, a god of war and law. "*Tîwaz" derives from the Proto-Indo-European base "*dei-", "*deyā-", "*dīdyā-", meaning 'to shine', whence comes also such words as "deity".
The Latin name "dies Martis" ("day of Mars") is equivalent to the Greek ἡμέρα Ἄρεως. In most languages with Latin origins (Italian, French, Spanish, Catalan, Romanian, Galician, Sardinian, Corsican, but not Portuguese), the day is named after Mars, the Ancient Greek Ares Ἄρης .
In some Slavic languages the word Tuesday originated from Old Church Slavonic word "въторъ" meaning ""the second"" (Serbian: "уторак" ("utorak")). Bulgarian and Russian "Вторник" (Vtornik) is derived from the Bulgarian and Russian adjective for 'Second' - "Втори" (Vtori) or "Второй" (Vtoroi)
In Japanese, the word Tuesday is 火曜日(ka youbi), meaning 'fire day' and is associated with 火星 (kasei): Mars (the planet), literally meaning "fire star". Similarly, in Korean the word Tuesday is 화요일 (hwa yo il), also meaning fire day.
In the Indo-Aryan languages Pali and Sanskrit the name of the day is taken from "Angaraka" ('one who is red in colour') a style (manner of address) for Mangal, the god of war, and for Mars, the red planet.
In the Nahuatl language, Tuesday is () meaning "day of Huitzilopochtli".
Religious observances.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Tuesdays are dedicated to Saint John the Baptist. The Octoechos contains hymns on this theme, arranged in an eight-week cycle, that are chanted on Tuesdays throughout the year. At the end of Divine Services on Tuesday, the dismissal begins with the words: "May Christ our True God, through the intercessions of his most-pure Mother, of the honorable and glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John…"
Cultural references.
In the Greek world, Tuesday (the day of the week of the Fall of Constantinople) is considered an unlucky day. The same is true in the Spanish-speaking world. For both Greeks and Spanish-speakers, the 13th of the month is considered unlucky if it falls on Tuesday, instead of Friday. In Judaism, on the other hand, Tuesday is considered a particularly lucky day, because in the first chapter of Genesis the paragraph about this day contains the phrase "it was good" twice.
In the Thai solar calendar, the day is named for the Pali word for the planet Mars, which also means "Ashes of the Dead"; the color associated with Tuesday is pink.
In the folk rhyme "Monday's Child", "Tuesday's child is full of grace".
Astrology.
Tuesday is associated with the planet Mars and shares that planet's symbol, ♂. As Mars rules over Aries and Scorpio, these signs are also associated with Tuesday.
Common occurrences.
United States.
Tuesday is the usual day for elections in the United States. Federal elections take place on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November; this date was established by a law of 1845 for presidential elections (specifically for the selection of the Electoral College), and was extended to elections for the House of Representatives in 1875 and for the Senate in 1914. Tuesday was the earliest day of the week which was practical for polling in the early 19th century: citizens might have to travel for a whole day to cast their vote, and would not wish to leave on Sunday which was a day of worship for the great majority of them. However, political scientists today suggest that moving elections to a day such as Sunday might increase voter turnout, as the employed would have an easier time voting.

</doc>
<doc id="54639" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54639" title="Young Talent Time">
Young Talent Time

Young Talent Time (YTT), was an Australian television variety program screened on Network Ten, produced by Lewis-Young Productions. The original series ran from 1971 until 1988 and was hosted by musician Johnny Young, for the entire length of its run. The show was briefly revived by Network Ten in 2012 and was hosted by musician and actor Rob Mills.
The series features a core group of young performers, in the vein of "The Mickey Mouse Club", and a weekly junior talent quest. The "Young Talent Team" perform popular classic songs along with the top hit songs of the day. The original program launched the careers of a number of Australian performers including Jamie Redfern, Tina Arena and Dannii Minogue and spawned numerous hit singles, fifteen Young Talent Time albums, a film, swap cards, boardgames, toys, and numerous Logie Awards.
The first episode (#1) of the original series aired on Channel 0 in Melbourne at 7.00pm on Saturday 24 April 1971. The final episode (#804) aired on Network Ten at 7.30pm on Friday 23 December 1988.
The first episode (#1) of the 2012 series aired on Network Ten at 6.30pm on Sunday 22 January 2012, through to 4 May 2012.
Young Talent Time (1971–1988).
Production details.
"Young Talent Time" (or simply "YTT") was produced as a joint venture by Lewis-Young Productions (the production partnership between host Johnny Young and his friend and colleague Kevin Lewis, one of the directors of Festival Records) and was taped mainly at the studios of ATV-10 in Nunawading, Melbourne although occasional shows were taped at the TEN-10 studios in Sydney or on location.
Many of the episodes from the early- to mid-1970s no longer exist as the tapes were wiped for re-use, being the official Network Ten policy at the time. Some later episodes from the series were repeated by pay TV broadcaster Foxtel in the late 1990s.
Because the series ran for such a long time and featured young performers, "Young Talent Time" made an indelible mark on the psyche of several generations of Australian children, leading them to believe that if they tried hard enough, they too could be a 'star' like the kids they saw on television (Johnny Young launched talent schools in his own name in the early 1980s).
One memorable aspect of the show was the regular closing number, where Johnny Young would croon a ballad version of The Beatles' song "All My Loving" (with which Young had had an Australian hit in 1966), accompanied by the entire cast, in an almost lullaby style, individually wishing all of the cast good night.
So often all credit for shows goes to the cast, yet without the extensive talented crew behind the upfront team who are rarely acknowledged, this production would not have been such a success. Sound engineers, Russell Thompson, Greg Gurney and Kris Young assured the quality of the singers voices came through. Talented cameramen such as Simon Hellings and Barry Cross to name a few gave beautiful sensitive shots of performances and direction from visionary people like Bob Loxton and Bob Collins all added up to making the show the both a success and contributed to its longevity.
On average, 44 episodes were produced per year for 18 years. The episodes were broadcast in black & white from April 1971 to April 1975, thereafter in colour. The final episode of the show - a Christmas-themed episode - aired on 23 December 1988. It was episode 804.
Network Ten announced on 17 August 2011 that it would revive the Young Talent Time format. The new series, which began airing in January 2012, was hosted by singer and actor Rob Mills and co-produced by Granada Media and Johnny Young.
Alumni.
Over the original run of the show, from 1971 to 1988, there were a total of 40 Young Talent Team members.
Members of the Team who found continued success after leaving the series and continue working as performers include Tina Arena, Jane Scali, Jamie Redfern, Dannii Minogue, Karen Knowles, Sally Boyden, Debra Byrne and Joe (Joey) Perrone.
Original Team member Rod Kirkham went on to host a children's television program, a regional TV variety show, built a successful music production company, moved to the US for several years and signed to a LA music publisher and later moved into the computer software industry working for Microsoft, Apple and Oracle and now runs I.T. consulting and software development firm "Bak2Bak Communications" in Queensland and also runs a publishing company with his wife, Barbara Llewellyn, called Bright Light Multimedia. Vikki Broughton toured Europe with iconic artists such as ABBA and Cliff Richard before retiring from showbusiness.
Phillip Gould spent a number of years performing on London's West End. During the same period Jane Scali was dominating the Australian cabaret circuit. Gould and Scali later appeared on stage together in musicals including "Annie". They both continue to perform.
Debra Byrne has also had a successful career on stage starring in "Cats", "Les Miserables", "Sunset Boulevard", "Mary Poppins" and many others, and starred in 2012 Nine Network television drama series "Tricky Business".
Trevor Hindmarch served three years in the Australian Army Reserve, spent many years acting on stage and television and has been running his own business in the Australian thoroughbred racing industry for the past fifteen years, "Hindmarch Racing", and has developed his successful Profiler horse racing software used and recommended by horse trainers and full-time investors alike. Hindmarch resides in Melbourne, not far from the old Channel 10 building, and lives with his wife Maria. He has five children - four sons Michael, Anthony, Sean and Joel, and a daughter Jessica.
Forced to leave the cast of "A Chorus Line" after an injury, Julie Ryles formed her own successful PR company. She died in January 2011 after a three-year battle against a rare disease. (More details in the section titled 'Deaths'.) She is survived by her daughter Samantha and a granddaughter.
Greg Mills became Young Talent Time's musical director after assisting previous director Ross Burton for many years, and continues to work in the music industry.
Derek Redfern went on to work as a carpenter and handyman for his local council, presumably in suburban Melbourne, but has since returned to performing.
Sally Boyden spent many years in London with her own band as a professional singer/composer and is now based in the USA.
Karen Knowles had a string of gold records, and continues to perform regularly around Australia - including performances at various Christmas concerts, including Melbourne's annual "Carols By Candlelight" and at the 2010 "Lord Mayor's Carols In The City" at the Riverstage in Brisbane. Knowles is also a qualified lawyer, a mother of one son, and runs a singing school in the Melbourne area.
Steven Zammit still performs occasionally and is a very successful singing teacher and vocal coach.
John Bowles went on to a successful career in cabaret and in music theatre, playing leads in shows like "Cats", "A Funny Thing Happened On The Way To The Forum", "Hello Dolly" and the romantic lead character of Raoul in 1,000 performances of "The Phantom Of The Opera" around the world. He is currently based in London.
Mark Stevens, after a two-year stint in Australian soap opera, "Neighbours" as Nick Page, relocated to the United Kingdom, where he is currently based. He is the creative director of the Pentecostal Church's Abundant Life Centre in Bradford and married a fellow Christian named Bethan.
Michael Campbell is also living in the UK, but no longer in the entertainment industry and whilst his real surname is Jackman, he went by his stepfather's surname of Campbell while on YTT.
Karen Dunkerton married jockey Darren Gauci in 1989 and together they have four children: Breanna, Sean, Jade and Brooke.
Joe Perrone went on to play Gino Rossini in "Neighbours", in 1987; guest-starred in the Australian sit-com "Acropolis Now" in 1992, and featured in the 1988 US motion picture "Phantom of the Ritz". He was based in Munich, Germany for a number of years but now resides back in Australia.
In 2003, three performers associated with "Young Talent Time" were simultaneously in the United States Billboard Magazine Dance Top 10 - Tina Arena with "Never (Past Tense)" and both Dannii Minogue with "I Begin to Wonder" and her sister Kylie Minogue with "Slow".
Team members Tina Arena and Dannii Minogue both continue to have resoundingly successful careers both in Australia and in Europe where they have become household names.
Natalie Miller continues performing, both as a solo artist and in bands, and in 2010 married her band's manager (and MasterChef Australia contestant) Aaron Harvie.
A number of the Team members of the 1971–88 series are on Facebook and are in contact with fans. There are also numerous YTT (support) pages/groups, and fan pages of Team members on Facebook. These pages/groups are run by fans and are supported by Team members. They are strictly administered and inappropriate material is removed.
Concerts and live appearances.
Over the 18 years of the original show, Johnny Young and the various Teams made numerous live appearances all over Australia, sometimes performing full concerts or just making short publicity appearances at venues ranging from large theatres, concert stages, sporting venues, theme parks, RSL Clubs, outdoor concert arenas (like Melbourne's Myer Music Bowl) and shopping centres.
In 1973 Johnny Young, The Young Talent Team and Denis Walter supported the "TV Week King of Pop" Jamie Redfern in a series of live concerts. "The Jamie Redfern Show" sold out a number of shows at Melbourne's Festival Hall, with the Team filling the first half of the night and Redfern belting out his hits in the second half.
Years later, in 1987, the Team were booked to appear in concert at the Westfield Shopping Centre, Parramatta. The centre had not anticipated the turnout of over 4,000 fans, and a near riot took place. Some fans were crushed in the crowd and the concert was cancelled as the team were hastily bundled out of the shopping centre, some of them in tears. Joey Dee had to be treated for a knee injury and Courtney Compagnino had to be treated for shock.
Seven-thousand fans attended the 1988 concert at the Rockhampton Music Bowl in Queensland.
But probably the biggest Young Talent Time concert took place in 1988. Over 12,000 people attended the outdoor concert held in Brisbane at the 1988 World Expo on the banks of the Brisbane River. It was broadcast the following week.
The Final Concert Tour: Johnny Young, "The Young Talent Team" and "The New Generation" performed a series of concerts just before Christmas 1988. Venues included the Perth Entertainment Centre, The Seagull Stadium on the Gold Coast, Memorial Drive in Adelaide, the Sydney Entertainment Centre and a final concert at the Melbourne Tennis Centre on 23 December 1988, the same night that the last episode of Young Talent Time went to air on Network Ten.
The Team also appeared in concert at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl on Australia Day 1989 - the day after the announcement of the show's demise.
The Luna Park incident.
In the early Seventies the team performed at Luna Park. The problem was they were able to get in but due to the crowd they were unable to get out. The management said they would stop the scenic railway and they could all escape through the tunnel. "Unfortunately, nobody told the train driver," said Greg Mills. "We looked over the top of the hill and we could see the train coming over the top and we're thinking, 'we're going to die'." The eight members of the team, Phillip Gould - Debbie Byrne - Greg Mills - Julie Ryles - Trevor Hindmarch - Jane Scali - Derek Redfern - Sally Boyden, pressed themselves against the wall of the tunnel and, according to Mills, "the train brushed my coat on the way through", that's how close it was.
Final years.
In 1988 Johnny Young finally realised his long-held dream of shooting an episode of the show in America. A two-hour special "Young Talent Time at Universal Studios" aired on 13 August 1988.
However, in its final years Young Talent Time began to struggle for ratings, particularly following the decision of the rival Nine Network to move its popular early morning variety show "Hey Hey It's Saturday" to an evening slot in 1984, putting it in direct competition to YTT on Saturday nights at 6.30pm. For four years, YTT had to endure a battle of ratings with "Hey, Hey" and inevitably, something had to give.
In October 1988 Network Ten intervened and finally decided to move YTT to Friday nights at 7.30pm, but to no avail: the move of nights and time slots did not help and the show was abruptly cancelled three months later.
On 25 January 1989 Renny Cunnack, General Manager of Channel 10 Melbourne, officially announced to the media that Young Talent Time would "not be resuming production in 1989". (Ironically, Renny Cunnack himself was let go as General Manager just three months later - two weeks after his boss Ian Gow had departed)
On Australia Day in 1989, the day after the show's cancellation was announced, the Young Talent Team performed a concert at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl in Melbourne, but nonetheless the cancellation of the show was a shock to the cast, crew and fans. Johnny Young was the most affected by it, because he had only recently invested a large amount of money in building his own TV studio complex in Richmond with the intention of producing the show himself and leasing it to Channel 10, but the termination of the show put paid to these dreams and he had to sell his family home to finance the debts. Other setbacks included the death of his stepmother, mother and the disintegration of his marriage to second wife Cathy.
Network Ten continued airing compilation episodes in early 1989, initially as "The Best of Young Talent Time" at 7.30 on Friday nights, then as "Young Talent Time Favorites" at 11.00 on Saturday mornings. The last of these aired in Melbourne on Saturday 1 April 1989.
On Saturday 6 May 1989 Johnny Young and his company Television House held a private party at Channel 10's Studio A, YTT's 18 year home-base studio, as an official "thank you to the YTT Family" - the cast, crew and their families who had worked on the show over the years.
Deaths.
Kevin Lewis, Johnny Young's business partner (at L & Y Productions and L & Y Records) died in the late 1970s.
One of the show's original judges, Fred Tupper, died on 15 March 1976.
Evie Hayes, the American-born music theatre star who appeared as a judge on the show for many years died on 26 December 1988 aged 76, after a long battle with Multiple Sclerosis. (On the Australian stage she had played the lead roles in hit shows including "Annie Get Your Gun", "Kiss Me, Kate", "Oklahoma!", "Call Me Madam" and "Funny Girl".) In the 1960s and 1970s Evie became a prominent Melbourne singing teacher, coaching Young Talent Timers's including Jamie Redfern. Just eight weeks before her death she performed at a World Expo '88 variety concert at the Lyric Theatre in Brisbane (26–27 October 1988).
Cast member Juanita Coco died on 2 May 1993. Her death devastated the YTT cast, crew and fans. Coco, aged 17, was a passenger in a vehicle involved in car accident which occurred on the way home from Scott Tiedgen's 20th birthday party. Tidgeon was Coco's boyfriend. He was not driving and survived the accident, but unfortunately, along with Coco, another passenger - Tidgeon's best friend, 21-year-old Brad Lacey - was also killed.
Cast member Julie Ryles died on 27 January 2011, after being diagnosed a few years earlier with a rare condition known as progressive subcortical gliosis. She left behind a daughter and granddaughter. Julie was only 53.
Ross Burton, one of Young Talent Time's longest-serving musical directors, was killed in a freak accident on 3 January 1996. Burton fell through the roof of his house-boat at Lake Eildon while he was trying to fix a television antenna and suffered critical internal injuries but was not discovered for 4 hours. He was airlifted to hospital and died on the operating table.
One of the show's directors, Terry Higgins, was diagnosed HIV positive in 1993 and died of AIDS in 1994.
Another one of the show's directors, Garry Dunstan, died after suffering a heart attack whilst out cycling on 22 October 2005.
"Caravan Holiday".
In the Christmas break between the first and second seasons of "Young Talent Time", Johnny Young and the Young Talent Team shot a 22-minute colour film. (At the time, Young Talent Time still screened in black and white on Australian television.)
Sponsored by the Caravan Trade & Industries Association "Caravan Holiday" was completed by early 1972 and released in cinemas across Australia as a supporting feature to Peter Bogdanovich's hugely popular US comedy picture "What's Up, Doc?" which starred Barbra Streisand and Ryan O'Neal.
A Lewis/Young Production, in association with Ansett Television Films, "Caravan Holiday" starred Rod Kirkham, Vikki Broughton, Philip Gould, Debbie Byrne, Jamie Redfern, Jane Scali and the two most recent additions to the team, Greg Mills and Julie Ryles.
It also featured comedian Buster Fiddess (as Mr Crawley) and Addie Black, and guest appearances by Johnny Young, Evie Hayes and John Farnham (then known as Johnny Farnham).
Fiddess died just a few days after he finished filming his scenes.
The film was written by Gillian Wadds, and produced and directed by Rob Weekes, with original music by Johnny Young.
The very loose storyline follows Buster Fiddess leading the four YTT boys, and Addie Black leading the four YTT girls in two separate caravans on a short "Caravan Holiday". They keep running into Johnny Young, who appears in various guises (sheep farmer, petrol pump attendant, etc.), and Jamie Redfern and Jane Scali bump into their idol Johnny Farnham at a caravan park. Debbie Byrne almost drowns at the beach but is rescued by a bunch of lifesavers.
It features the opening title song "Reach For The Sun (Summer Holiday)" (released as a single to coincide with the film's release) and a memorable music-fantasy sequence, where the Team perform a cover version of The Cowsills 1967 song "The Rain, The Park & Other Things".
It screened on television just once, on Christmas Eve 1972. It was then unseen for three decades until a restored version was featured as a bonus extra on the 2002 DVD "Young Talent Time: The Collection" (Universal Pictures - 2002).
Young Talent Time DVDs.
A one-hour prime-time television documentary "Young Talent Time Tells All" aired on Network Ten on 29 October 2001.
A small reunion of YTT cast and crew members (including Tina Arena, Dannii Minogue and Johnny Young) was held in Melbourne in October 2003 to celebrate the release of an extended version of the "Young Talent Time Tells All" documentary on DVD (through Universal Pictures). The DVD, which contained added bonus features and rare footage not seen in the television documentary, was titled "Young Talent Time: The Collection".
Bonus features on the DVD include a restored version of the 1972 short film "Caravan Holiday" featuring Johnny Young and the Young Talent Team; full biographies of all 40 Team Members and Johnny Young; Nicole Kidman's appearance as a guest on the show to promote her 1983 film BMX Bandits; assorted television commercials featuring members of the team; footage of some of the Team when they appeared as contestants on the show; and the full-length clip of sisters Dannii Minogue and Kylie Minogue performing the song "Sisters Are Doing It For Themselves".
Rare footage includes a nine-year-old Jamie Redfern (pre-Young Talent Time) appearing with Happy Hammond on a Channel Seven test broadcast of colour television in 1968, seven years before Australian television actually began broadcasting in colour.
List of team members 1971–1988.
Team members from 1971 to 1988 in order of appearance:
Recordings.
Team albums
1) Young Talent Time (Festival Records - 1971)<br>
2) Young Talent Time: Volume 2 (Festival Records - 1972)<br>
3) Johnny Young and the Young Talent Team Sing The Hits (L&Y Records - 1973)<br>
4) Young Talent Time Hits! Volume 4 (L&Y Records - 1974)<br>
5) Young Talent Time: Favourite Hits - Volume 5 (L&Y Records - 1975)<br>
6) Johnny Young & The Young Talent Team: Mother's Favourites (L&Y Records - 1976)<br>
7) The Young Talent Team Salutes ABBA (L&Y Records - 1976)<br>
8) Sing Sing Sing with the Young Talent Team (Pisces Records - 1977)<br>
9) Johnny Young & The Young Talent Team Sing The Hits (J&B Records - 1980)<br>
10) Johnny Young & The Young Talent Team: Just For Fun (Hammard Records - 1981)<br>
11) The Young Talent Team 10th Anniversary Album (K-Tel Records - 1981)<br>
12) Young Talent Team: Now & Then - 15th Anniversary Album (Hammard Records - 1985)<br>
13) Young Talent Team: Phenomenon (Hammard Records - 1987)<br>
13a) The New Generation ("Phenomenon" album repackaged for the USA) (Hammard Records - 1987)<br>
14) The New Young Talent Team Super Hits 88/89 (Hammard Records - 1988)<br>
15) Johnny Young & The Young Talent Teams: The Final Farewell (Hammard Records - 1989 - only released as a Double Cassette Tape Gift Pack)
Team singles
1) Reach For The Sun - Johnny Young & The Young Talent Team / What Have They Done To My Song Ma? - The Young Talent Team (Festival - 1972)<br>
2) Sing - The Young Talent Team / If I Could Write A Song - Evie Hayes (L & Y Records - 1973) <br>
3) Do The Right Thing - The Young Talent Team / Happy Disco - The Young Talent Team (Festival Records - 1979)
"(The songs "Reach For The Sun" and "Happy Disco" were both written by Johnny Young)"
Individual singles
In the early years of the show, many of the Team Members released a range of their own singles and albums, some of them through Kevin Lewis and Johnny Young's own label "L & Y Records" and through Kevin Lewis's former label Festival Records.
The singles included:
Rod Kirkham - "Wobbly"backed with "Words" (Festival 1971) and "I Can't Get Sunday Out of My Mind" backed with "I'm Talking To Myself Again" (Image 1973)
Vikki Broughton - "Good, Good Morning" and "Don't You Knock On My Door"
Philip Gould - "Have I The Right?"
Debbie Byrne - "He's A Rebel" and "Da Doo Run Run"
Jamie Redfern - "The Little White Cloud That Cried"(1971), "When You Wish Upon A Star"(1971), "Rainbow On The River"(1972), "Venus"(1973), "Hello, Funny Face"(1973), "Hitch A Ride On A Smile(1973)" "Jenny(1974)"
Jane Scali - "Having A Good Time"
Trevor Hindmarch - "Milly Molly Mandy"
Sally Boyden - "Shirley Got Married"
Derek Redfern - "Put Your Head On My Shoulder"
Karen Knowles - "Why Won't You Explain?"
Johnny Bowles - "I Can Jump Puddles"
Notable guests.
Over the years many celebrities and performers made guest appearances on the show including John Farnham, Graham Kennedy, Nicole Kidman, Dame Edna Everage, Davy Jones, Micky Dolenz, Phyllis Diller, Debbie Reynolds, Kylie Minogue, Johnny O'Keefe, Peter Allen, Lovelace Watkins, Normie Rowe, Russell Morris, Billy Thorpe, Demis Roussos, Jason Donovan, John Paul Young, Kamahl, Renee Geyer, Denise Drysdale, John Williamson, Ian 'Molly' Meldrum and Denis Walter, and bands including Sherbet, The Mixtures, The Four Kinsmen, Little River Band, The Reels and even The Wombles!
Sports stars to guest on the show include Pat Cash, Jeff Fenech, Lionel Rose, Max Walker and jockey Darren Gauci (who ended up marrying YTT member Karen Dunkerton after meeting her on the show!).
Sight Acts, Magicians and Illusionists who appeared on the show include Tim Ellis, Ross Skiffington, Sam Angelico, Zig & Zag, Ron Challinor, Chris Kirby, Ron Blasket and Gerry Gee, Syd Heylen Jnr, Marty Coffey, Timothy Hyde and Hubert the Super Magician.
Notable contestants.
Many members of the 'Young Talent Team' actually began on Young Talent Time as contestants before being hired as regular cast members. They include Dannii Minogue (as Danielle Minogue), Vince Del Tito, Debbie Hancock, Natalie Miller, John Bowles, Tina Arena "(as Filippina Arena)", Robert McCullough, Karen Knowles, Jodie Lobert, Joey Perrone, Johnnie Nuich, Lorena Novoa, Vanessa Windsor, Steven Zammit, Mark McCormack and Trevor Hindmarch.
Other well-known Australian performers who also got their start as a contestant on the show include Asher Keddie, Alyce Platt, Denis Walter, John Foreman, Maria Mercedes, Sylvie Paladino, Marty Fields and Michael Cormick.
Gisella Cozzo is a singer songwriter and won the grand final in 1984 as a contestant .
TV Week Logie Awards.
Logies Awarded:<br> 
Best Australian Musical Variety Show of 1971<br>
Best Australian Musical Variety Show of 1973<br>
Best Australian Musical Variety Show of 1974<br>
Best Australian Musical Variety Show of 1975
Special TV Week Logie:<br> 
Award for Sustained Excellence (presented in 1982)
Other TV Week Logie Awards:<br> 
1971 Jamie Redfern - George Wallace Memorial Award Best Newcomer<br>
1974 Debbie Byrne - Best Australian Teenage Personality<br>
1975 Debbie Byrne - Best Australian Teenage Personality<br>
1990 Johnny Young - Logie Hall Of Fame
In 1986 Joey Perrone was nominated for Best Juvenile Performance (for his work on Young Talent Time) at the TV Week Logie Awards.
The New Generation (1988).
In 1988 Johnny Young launched an American version of the show re-titled "The New Generation".
Produced in Australia, it starred the current senior members of the "Young Talent Team" - Dannii Minogue, Vince Del Tito, Natalie Miller, Lorena Novoa, Beven Addinsall, and a new member, black teenager Keith Williams, who was imported from Los Angeles.
It also featured regular guest appearances from the younger members of the current "Young Talent Team" who were billed as "The Young Generation" (Jamie Churchill, Johnnie Nuich, Joey Dee, Courtney Compagnino, Juanita Coco and Rikki Arnot).
Interestingly none of the surnames of any of the young performers were ever mentioned on this version of the show. They were only referred to by their first names.
"The New Generation" was hosted by American Michael Young, the host of the Emmy Award winning "Kids Are People Too".
13 x 30 minute episodes were produced by Johnny Young's Television House and Fries Entertainment (US) and screened on The Family Channel in the US.
Young Talent Time (1990).
Even though the show had ended its 18-year television network run, in 1990 Johnny Young used his own money, and his television studio and recording complex in Melbourne to produce a one-off direct-to-video special "Young Talent Time Now - 1990".
Again hosted by Young, it featured the six final members of the "Young Talent Team" - Jamie Churchill, Johnnie Nuich, Joey Dee, Courtney Compagnino, Juanita Coco and Rikki Arnot, with a guest appearance by former Team Member Beven Addinsall.
This now hard-to-find VHS video is today considered a rare but genuine collectors item and has never been released on DVD.
Young Talent Time (2012).
Network Ten and Granada Media Australia - in conjunction with Johnny Young and Johnny Young Music - were the producers of a revival of "Young Talent Time". Taped before a live studio audience at Fox Studios in Sydney, the 16-episode series debuted on Network Ten across Australia at 6.30 pm on Sunday 22 January 2012.
Hosted by former "Australian Idol 2003" contestant Rob Mills, the 2012 revival featured a regular Young Talent Team (of 10 members) performing a couple of group numbers each week, with one team member featuring in a solo spot each episode to showcase their individual talents. Starting from Episode 10, duets were sung instead of solos as each team member had performed a solo.
Each weekly episode featured three or four young contestants (or acts) under the age of 16. These solo performers, duos, groups, etc., included singers, dancers (ballet, hip hop, tap, jazz, etc.), musicians, sight acts, illusionists, comedians and so on. The winning contestant (or act) each week received $5,000 from NAB (National Australia Bank) and the Grand Final winner received $100,000.
The show's two judges/mentors were the original show's longest-serving Young Talent Team member Tina Arena (who appeared from 1977 to 1983 – six years 6 Months), and Filipino-American choreographer Charles Klapow, one of the winners of the Emmy Award for ‘Outstanding Choreography’ for "High School Musical 2". Better known as 'Chucky' Klapow, he also helped choreograph the films "Cheetah Girls 2, High School Musical and " as well as appearing in all three "High School Musical" movies as a dancer. He has choreographed for Mick Jagger and dances alongside Michael Jackson in the film "Michael Jackson's This Is It". Klapow had previously been a judge on UK talent show "Don't Stop Believing". TV Personality Ian Dickson filled in as judge while Tina Arena was ill for one episode. From the beginning of the finals competition he served as a full-time judge.
While the judges decided the winning contestant (or act) of each weekly episode, viewers could vote online for any of the weekly runners-up to become a 'wild-card' entrant, giving them a second chance of making it into the finals. On 20 March, it was announced that YTT would move to Fridays at 7:30 to 8:30, the current time slot of Glee. It is believed YTT was moved because of poor ratings on Sunday night resulting in the much more popular program "The Biggest Loser" taking the 6:30 to 7:30 timeslot. The YTT team then commenced a tour having shows in Melbourne, Sydney and Canberra. The Grand Final episode was aired on 4 May. The talent quest was won by first heat entrants and wildcard winners Lil' Banditz Krew. The all-boys Hip Hop troupe toured with the YTT team and Rob Mills in June & July 2012, visiting various Sydney venues as well as Melbourne and Canberra. YTT was not renewed for the 2013 season because of poor ratings.

</doc>
<doc id="54644" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54644" title="Manowar">
Manowar

Manowar is an American heavy metal band from New York City, New York. Formed in 1980, the group is known for lyrics based on fantasy (particularly sword and sorcery) and mythology (particularly Norse mythology). The band is also known for a loud and bombastic sound. In an interview for MTV in February 2007, bassist Joey DeMaio lamented that "these days, there's a real lack of big, epic metal that is drenched with crushing guitars and choirs and orchestras... so it's nice to be one of the few bands that's actually doing that." In 1984 the band was included in the Guinness Book of World Records for delivering the loudest performance, a record which they have since broken on 2 occasions. They also hold the world record for the longest heavy metal concert after playing for 5 hours and 1 minute in Bulgaria in 2008. They also have been known for their slogan "Death to false metal".
Although the band has never been a mainstream commercial success in the United States, they maintain a strong cult following there. In contrast, they are extremely popular in the heavy metal scene in Europe and South America. Dedicated fans are known and referred to by the band as "Metal Warriors", "Manowarriors", "Immortals" or "Brothers of Metal"..
Biography.
Origins (1980–1981).
New York based Manowar's history began in 1980 when Joey DeMaio, the future bassist of the band met guitarist Ross the Boss while working as a bass tech and fireworks manager for Black Sabbath on the "Heaven and Hell" tour. Ross the Boss, a former member of the punk rock band The Dictators, was the guitar player in Black Sabbath's support band, Shakin' Street. The two bonded over their shared musical interests, became friends and decided to form a band.
At the end of the tour with Black Sabbath, the duo got together to form Manowar. To complete the roster, they hired singer Eric Adams, a former classmate and friend of DeMaio, .
First album (1981–1982).
On the strength of their debut demo, Manowar secured a recording contract with label Liberty Records in 1981. The label pressured the band to produce a good number of songs in a short time towards a debut album. The resultant album, "Battle Hymns", was released the following year. The legendary actor and director Orson Welles served in the role of narrator on "Dark Avenger".
Soon after the album's release, Manowar engaged in their first tour. The band played support for hard rocker Ted Nugent, but their collaboration lasted only a few months.
Manowar then decided to put together a short tour by themselves and all the arrangements were made in a few weeks by their manager. Despite these setbacks, the band gained domestic fame on this short tour and also began to get their first European fans, particularly in the United Kingdom and in Germany. Stressed from the strain of the continuing performances, Hamzik decided to leave the band at the end of this tour and was replaced with Scott Columbus.
"Into Glory Ride" (1983–1988).
By 1983, the band left Liberty Records and struck a deal with Megaforce Records in the US and Music for Nations in Europe —signing the contract in their own blood. The signing was a cover story in the 1983 July/ August issue # 47 of Kerrang!
By the time Manowar returned home, they immediately went into a recording studio to produce what, in the intentions of the group, would have been a simple EP, but came out instead, due to the quantity and quality of the tracks made in that period, as the band's second album, "Into Glory Ride". An EP was actually published in 1983 with the title "Defender" containing, as its main track, the eponymous song, which included more work by Orson Welles. The atmosphere of the album evoked classical heroic fantasy and mythology, and served as a predecessor to viking metal. It contained several innovative features, both in style and sound, and led to a huge increase in the number of fans of the group, particularly in the United Kingdom, where the band planned a long tour that was ultimately canceled. The song "Defender" was later re-recorded and included in the "Fighting the World" album of 1987.
To apologize for the failure of their UK tour, Manowar decided to dedicate their next album to the United Kingdom. The album, "Hail to England", was recorded and mixed in just six days and was released in early 1984. Its promotional tour, "Spectacle of Might", had a large number of dates in England. The tour saw Manowar initially as support band for Mercyful Fate, but soon the group led by DeMaio was put in the headline slot.
Manowar soon returned to work in the recording studio. After leaving Music for Nations, the quartet released "Sign of the Hammer" a mere ten months after their previous album. The new record presented stark changes in rhythm, with very technical tracks characterized by a slow pace, like the epic "Mountains", and quick ones, as the eponymous "Sign of the Hammer". It's success enabled band to embark on a two-year world tour, after which they took 1986 off.
Following further disagreements with their new label, the group changed record label to Atlantic Records in 1987. Via Atlantic, they released "Fighting the World", which enjoyed more extensive distribution and increased the band's prominence in the international heavy metal scene. Album art was designed by Ken Kelly, .
"Kings of Metal" (1988–1992).
In 1988, Manowar released the album "Kings of Metal", which is the band's best known work. Songs like "Heart of Steel", "Kings of Metal" and "Hail and Kill" are performed regularly in concerts. "Kings of Metal" is Manowar's highest-selling album worldwide.
Manowar embarked on a world tour, for a period of approximately three years, with stops in almost all European nations. During that tour, Joey DeMaio "fired" Ross the Boss. According to a 2008 interview with the guitarist, "Joey felt that Manowar would be better without me." He was replaced by David Shankle, who was chosen by members of the band after a search among about 150 candidates. Scott Columbus later also decided to leave the band during the Kings of Metal tour. Columbus himself picked his replacement Kenny Earl Edwards (soon nicknamed 'Rhino').
New albums, first video and live publications (1992–2002).
A new musical unit after the recent changes, Manowar released "The Triumph of Steel" in 1992. It gained some success and was particularly famous for the presence of a suite lasting no less than 28 minutes entitled "Achilles, Agony and Ecstasy in Eight Parts", inspired by the events of the "Iliad" and the hero Achilles. After this release, the band went on a world tour for two years. After the expiration of their contract with Atlantic, the band signed with Geffen Records. In 1994, Shankle unexpectedly left the band to form his own group. He was replaced by Karl Logan, a musician met by DeMaio during a motor meeting. The same year saw the unexpected return of Scott Columbus, who replaced Edwards.
In 1996, they released "Louder Than Hell", their first new studio album in four years. Despite good sales the album was criticized for its simple style.
Despite such criticisms, Manowar released a new collection, called "Anthology", and their first live album, "Hell on Wheels", released by BMG International in the guise of a double CD containing all the most popular songs of the group. Not having the time to record a new studio album because of the ongoing promotional tour, Manowar released a second live album, "Hell on Stage".
"Warriors of the World", "Hell On Earth" and Magic Circle Music (2002–2005).
In 2002, six years after the last studio album, Manowar released the "Warriors of the World" album. "Warriors of the World" presented a sound somewhat renewed in style, but maintained the usual energy and power. The most famous tracks from the album became "Warriors of the World United", "House of Death" and "Call to Arms", in addition to Puccini's aria "Nessun Dorma", covered in honor of the Italian fans and sung live for the first time in a concert in Milan.
Manowar then began a long world tour, called "Warriors of the World United Tour" that kept them busy and away from a recording studio for a long time. To compensate for the lack of studio albums, the band released several DVDs: in 2002 the video "Fire and Blood", in 2003 "Hell on Earth Part III" and in 2005 "Hell on Earth Part IV". These (and all DVDs since the year 2000) were directed by Neil Johnson, and have all been certified Gold in Germany.
In 2003, DeMaio founded his own record label, Magic Circle Music, which became the official home of the band, having been created to fit the needs of Manowar, and other bands of similar genre. Under the label Magic Circle were also released the EP "The Sons of Odin" with footage taken during the Earthshaker Fest 2005.
"Gods of War" (2006–2009).
Manowar released "Gods of War" through Magic Circle Music in 2007. After playing numerous shows in Europe, including a concert that spanned the course of two nights, they worked on a new EP, entitled "Thunder in the Sky", which was released in 2009. The EP consisted of two discs: the first playing the regular track list; the second playing the song "Father" in fifteen different languages.
2010–2013.
On June 1, 2010, "Classic Rock" magazine published an interview with drummer Scott Columbus who said he has not worked with the band since April 2008 and has in fact left the band. No official statement from Manowar has been made as yet and their website still includes Columbus on the promotional pictures and current lineup. He also said that statements made in the past, regarding his break in 1990 and 2008 because of an illness and a personal tragedy, were largely untrue and were made without his agreement. Later that year, on October 15, 2010 Joey DeMaio announced on Facebook that Hamzik was officially a member of Manowar again after a 26-year absence. Scott Columbus died less than a year later on April 4, 2011 aged 54. His cause of death is still uncertain.
Manowar's subsequent release was a re-recording of their 1982 debut album, "Battle Hymns". This album was released on 26 November 2010, with the narration of Sir Christopher Lee and formally entitled "Battle Hymns MMXI". A special edition of the album featuring 4 live tracks from the first leg of the Battle Hymns Tour was released on July 26, 2011.
On July 21, 2011 the band played a UK tour for the first time in 16 years in November and played Battle Hymns in its entirety.
Manowar's new studio album, "The Lord of Steel", was released worldwide on June 16, 2012 exclusively on iTunes and on the band's own online store. The album sees a reversion from the symphonic elements present on the Gods of War album back to a more straightforward, heavy metal sound. The song 'El Gringo' from the album has also been featured as a part of the soundtrack to the film "El Gringo".
After the Lord of Steel tour was over in 2013, Manowar released a live EP, titled "The Lord of Steel Live", which included six live tracks recorded during the tour.
"Kings of Metal MMXIV" and upcoming studio album (2014–present).
On the 28th July 2013, Manowar announced that they will be re-recording their 1988 release Kings Of Metal with an expected release date of late 2013. Brian Blessed will be doing the narration for the track "The Warrior's Prayer". Like the re-recording of "Battle Hymns MMXI", this album will allow the band to use modern day technology.
"Kings of Metal MMXIV" was released through iTunes as a digital download on 4 February 2014. Hard copies of the album were released on 28 February.
Manowar started a world tour in support of their Kings of Metal MMXIV album in Chicago, US.
On 22 May, 2015 the band announced that they are currently working on a new studio album that is set to be released in early 2016.
Awards.
Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards

</doc>
<doc id="54648" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54648" title="Solar flare">
Solar flare

A solar flare is a sudden flash of brightness observed near the Sun's surface.
It involves a very broad spectrum of emissions, requiring an energy release of up to 6 × 1025 joules of energy (roughly the equivalent of 160,000,000,000 megatons of TNT, over 25,000 times more energy than released from the impact of Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9 with Jupiter).
Flares are often, but not always, accompanied by a coronal mass ejection. The flare ejects clouds of electrons, ions, and atoms through the corona of the sun into space. These clouds typically reach Earth a day or two after the event. The term is also used to refer to similar phenomena in other stars, where the term stellar flare applies.
Solar flares affect all layers of the solar atmosphere (photosphere, chromosphere, and corona), when the plasma medium is heated to tens of millions of Kelvin, while the cosmic-ray-like electrons, protons, and heavier ions are accelerated to near the speed of light. They produce radiation across the electromagnetic spectrum at all wavelengths, from radio waves to gamma rays, although most of the energy is spread over frequencies outside the visual range and for this reason the majority of the flares are not visible to the naked eye and must be observed with special instruments. Flares occur in active regions around sunspots, where intense magnetic fields penetrate the photosphere to link the corona to the solar interior.
Flares are powered by the sudden (timescales of minutes to tens of minutes) release of magnetic energy stored in the corona. The same energy releases may produce coronal mass ejections (CME), although the relation between CMEs and flares is still not well established.
X-rays and UV radiation emitted by solar flares can affect Earth's ionosphere and disrupt long-range radio communications. Direct radio emission at decimetric wavelengths may disturb the operation of radars and other devices that use those frequencies.
Solar flares were first observed on the Sun by Richard Christopher Carrington and independently by Richard Hodgson in 1859 as localized visible brightenings of small areas within a sunspot group. Stellar flares can be inferred by looking at the lightcurves produced from the telescope or satellite data of variety of other stars.
The frequency of occurrence of solar flares varies, from several per day when the Sun is particularly "active" to less than one every week when the Sun is "quiet", following the 11-year cycle (the solar cycle). Large flares are less frequent than smaller ones.
On July 23, 2012, a massive, and potentially damaging, solar superstorm (solar flare, coronal mass ejection, solar EMP) barely missed Earth, according to NASA. According to NASA, there may be as much as a 12% chance of a similar event occurring between 2012 and 2022, although because this particular figure was based on an extreme extrapolation of the calculated frequency of future storms, the actual probability of this is almost certainly rather lower than 12 percent.
Cause.
Flares occur when sped up charged particles, mainly electrons, interact with the plasma medium.
Scientific research suggests that the phenomenon of magnetic reconnection leads to this copious acceleration of charged particles.
On the Sun, magnetic reconnection may happen on solar arcades – a series of closely occurring loops of magnetic lines of force. These lines of force quickly reconnect into a low arcade of loops leaving a helix of magnetic field unconnected to the rest of the arcade. The sudden release of energy in this reconnection is the origin of the particle acceleration. The unconnected magnetic helical field and the material that it contains may violently expand outwards forming a coronal mass ejection. This also explains why solar flares typically erupt from what are known as the active regions on the Sun where magnetic fields are much stronger on average.
Although there is a general agreement on the flares' causes, the details are still not well known. It is not clear how the magnetic energy is transformed into the particle kinetic energy, nor is it known how the particles are accelerated to energies as high as 10 MeV (mega electron volt) and beyond. There are also some inconsistencies regarding the total number of accelerated particles, which sometimes seems to be greater than the total number in the coronal loop. Scientists are unable to forecast flares, even to this day.
Classification.
Solar flares are classified as A, B, C, M or X according to the peak flux (in watts per square metre, W/m2) of 100 to 800 picometre X-rays near Earth, as measured on the GOES spacecraft.
Within a class there is a linear scale from 1 to 9.n (apart from X), so an X2 flare is twice as powerful as an X1 flare, and is four times more powerful than an M5 flare.
H-alpha classification.
An earlier flare classification is based on Hα spectral observations. The scheme uses both the intensity and emitting surface. The classification in intensity is qualitative, referring to the flares as: (f)aint, (n)ormal or (b)rilliant. The emitting surface is measured in terms of "millionths" of the hemisphere and is described below. (The total hemisphere area "AH" = 15.5 × 1012 km2.)
A flare then is classified taking S or a number that represents its size and a letter that represents its peak intensity, v.g.: Sn is a "normal sunflare".
Hazards.
Solar flares strongly influence the local space weather in the vicinity of the Earth. They can produce streams of highly energetic particles in the solar wind, known as a solar proton event. These particles can impact the Earth's magnetosphere (see main article at geomagnetic storm), and present radiation hazards to spacecraft and astronauts. Additionally, massive solar flares are sometimes accompanied by coronal mass ejections (CMEs) which can trigger geomagnetic storms that have been known to disable satellites and knock out terrestrial electric power grids for extended periods of time.
The soft X-ray flux of X class flares increases the ionization of the upper atmosphere, which can interfere with short-wave radio communication and can heat the outer atmosphere and thus increase the drag on low orbiting satellites, leading to orbital decay. Energetic particles in the magnetosphere contribute to the aurora borealis and aurora australis. Energy in the form of hard x-rays can be damaging to spacecraft electronics and are generally the result of large plasma ejection in the upper chromosphere.
The radiation risks posed by solar flares are a major concern in discussions of a manned mission to Mars, the Moon, or other planets. Energetic protons can pass through the human body, causing biochemical damage, presenting a hazard to astronauts during interplanetary travel. Some kind of physical or magnetic shielding would be required to protect the astronauts. Most proton storms take at least two hours from the time of visual detection to reach Earth's orbit. A solar flare on January 20, 2005 released the highest concentration of protons ever directly measured, giving astronauts as little as 15 minutes to reach shelter.
Observations.
Flares produce radiation across the electromagnetic spectrum, although with different intensity. They are not very intense at "white light", but they can be very bright at particular atomic lines. They normally produce bremsstrahlung in X-rays and synchrotron radiation in radio.
History.
Optical observations. Richard Carrington observed a flare for the first time on 1 September 1859 projecting the image produced by an optical telescope, without filters. It was an extraordinarily intense "white light flare". Since flares produce copious amounts of radiation at Hα, adding a narrow ( ≈1 Å) passband filter centered at this wavelength to the optical telescope, allows the observation of not very bright flares with small telescopes. For years Hα was the main, if not the only, source of information about solar flares. Other passband filters are also used.
Radio observations. During World War II, on 25 and 26 February 1942, British radar operators observed radiation that Stanley Hey interpreted as solar emission. Their discovery did not go public until the end of the conflict. The same year Southworth also observed the Sun in radio, but as with Hey, his observations were only known after 1945. In 1943 Grote Reber was the first to report radioastronomical observations of the Sun at 160 MHz. The fast development of radioastronomy revealed new peculiarities of the solar activity like "storms" and "bursts" related to the flares. Today ground-based radiotelescopes observe the Sun from ~15 MHz up to 400 GHz.
Space telescopes. Since the beginning of space exploration, telescopes have been sent to space, where they work at wavelengths shorter than UV, which are completely absorbed by the atmosphere, and where flares may be very bright. Since the 1970s, the GOES series of satellites observe the Sun in "soft" X-rays, and their observations became the "standard measure" of flares, diminishing the importance of the Hα classification. "Hard" X-rays were observed by many different instruments, the most important today being the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI). Nonetheless, UV observations are today the "stars" of solar imaging with their incredible fine details that reveal the complexity of the solar corona. Spacecraft may also bring radio detectors at extremely long wavelengths (as long as a few kilometers) that cannot propagate through the ionosphere.
Space telescopes.
The following spacecraft missions have flares as their main observation target.
Examples of large solar flares.
The most powerful flare ever observed was the first one to be observed, on September 1, 1859, and was reported by British astronomer Richard Carrington and independently by an observer named Richard Hodgson. The event is named the Solar storm of 1859, or the "Carrington event". The flare was visible to a naked eye (in "white light"), and produced stunning auroras down to tropical latitudes such as Cuba or Hawaii, and set telegraph systems on fire. The flare left a trace in Greenland ice in the form of nitrates and beryllium-10, which allow its strength to be measured today. Cliver and Svalgaard reconstructed the effects of this flare and compared with other events of the last 150 years. In their words: "While the 1859 event has close rivals or superiors in each of the above categories of space weather activity, it is the only documented event of the last ∼150 years that appears at or near the top of all of the lists".
In modern times, the largest solar flare measured with instruments occurred on November 4, 2003. This event saturated the GOES detectors, and because of this its classification is only approximate. Initially, extrapolating the GOES curve, it was estimated to be X28. Later analysis of the ionospheric effects suggested increasing this estimate to X45. This event produced the first clear evidence of a new spectral component above 100 GHz.
Other large solar flares also occurred on April 2, 2001 (X20), October 28, 2003 (X17.2 and 10), September 7, 2005 (X17), February 17, 2011 (X2), August 9, 2011 (X6.9), March 7, 2012 (X5.4), July 6, 2012 (X1.1). On July 6, 2012, a solar storm hit just after midnight UK time, when an X1.1 solar flare fired out of the AR1515 sunspot. Another X1.4 solar flare from AR 1520 region of the Sun, second in the week, reached the Earth on July 15, 2012 with a geomagnetic storm of G1–G2 level. A X1.8-class flare was recorded on October 24, 2012. There has been major solar flare activity in early 2013, notably within a 48-hour period starting on May 12, 2013, a total of four X-class solar flares were emitted ranging from an X1.2 and upwards of an X3.2, the latter of which was one of the largest year 2013 flares. Departing sunspot complex AR2035-AR2046 erupted on April 25, 2014 at 0032 UT, producing a strong X1.3-class solar flare and an HF communications blackout on the dayside of Earth. NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory recorded a flash of extreme ultraviolet radiation from the explosion.
In early November 2015, solar flares disrupted the air traffic control system in central and southern Sweden, causing heavy delays for passengers.
Flare spray.
Flare sprays are a type of eruption associated with solar flares. They involve faster ejections of material than eruptive prominences, and reach velocities of 20 to 2000 kilometers per second.
Prediction.
Current methods of flare prediction are problematic, and there is no certain indication that an active region on the Sun will produce a flare. However, many properties of sunspots and active regions correlate with flaring. For example, magnetically complex regions (based on line-of-sight magnetic field) called delta spots produce the largest flares. A simple scheme of sunspot classification due to McIntosh, or related to fractal complexity . is commonly used as a starting point for flare prediction. Predictions are usually stated in terms of probabilities for occurrence of flares above M or X GOES class within 24 or 48 hours. The U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) issues forecasts of this kind.
References.
Sources

</doc>
<doc id="54653" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54653" title="Chromosphere">
Chromosphere

The chromosphere (literally, "sphere of color") is the second of the three main layers in the Sun's atmosphere and is roughly 2,000 kilometers deep. It sits just above the photosphere and just below the solar transition region.
The density of the chromosphere is very low being only 10−4 times that of the photosphere, the layer just below it, and 10−8 times that of the atmosphere of Earth. This makes the chromosphere normally invisible and it can be seen only during a total eclipse, where its reddish color is revealed. The color hues are anywhere between pink and red.
However, without special equipment, the chromosphere cannot normally be seen due to the overwhelming brightness of the photosphere.
The density of the chromosphere decreases with distance from the center of the sun. This decreases logarithmically from 1017 particles per cubic centimeter, or approximately to under at the outer boundary. The temperature begins to decrease from the inner boundary of about 6,000 K to a minimum of approximately 3,800 K, before increasing to upwards of 35,000 K at the outer boundary with the transition layer of the corona. Figure 1 shows the trends which density and temperature follow through the chromosphere.
Chromospheres have been observed also for stars different from the Sun.
Comparing chromosphere and photosphere.
Whilst the photosphere has an absorption line spectrum, the chromosphere's spectrum is dominated by emission lines. In particular, one of its strongest lines is the "H"α at a wavelength of 656.3 nm; this line is emitted by a hydrogen atom whenever its electron makes a transition from the "n"=3 to the "n"=2 energy level. A wavelength of 656.3 nm is in the red part of the spectrum, which causes the chromosphere to have its characteristic reddish colour. 
By analysing the spectrum of the chromosphere, it was found that the temperature of this layer of the solar atmosphere increases with increasing height in the chromosphere itself. The temperature at the top of photosphere is only about 4,400 K, while at the top of chromosphere, some 2,000 km higher, it reaches 25,000 K. This is however the opposite of what we find in the photosphere, where the temperature drops with increasing height.
It is not yet fully understood what phenomenon causes the temperature of the chromosphere to paradoxically increase further from the Sun's interior. However, it seems likely to be explained, partially or totally, by magnetic reconnection.
Features.
Many interesting phenomena can be observed in the chromosphere, which is very complex and dynamic:
See the flash spectrum of the solar chromosphere (Eclipse of March 7, 1970).

</doc>
<doc id="54662" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54662" title="Terror (disambiguation)">
Terror (disambiguation)

Terror is a type of fear, an emotional response to threats or danger.
Terror may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="54663" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54663" title="You Can't Do That on Television">
You Can't Do That on Television

"You Can't Do That on Television" is a Canadian television program that first aired locally in 1979 before airing internationally in 1981. It featured pre-teen and teenaged actors in a sketch comedy format similar to that of the United States "Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In" and "Saturday Night Live". Each episode had a specific theme normally relating to pop culture of the time. The show was notable for launching the careers of many performers, including alternative rock singer-songwriter Alanis Morissette, and screenwriter Bill Prady, who would write and produce shows like "The Big Bang Theory", "Gilmore Girls" and "Dharma and Greg".
The show was produced by and aired on Ottawa's CTV station CJOH-TV, and was marketed specifically for an American audience. After production ended in 1990, the show continued in reruns on the Nickelodeon cable network in the United States through 1994, when it was replaced with the similar themed sketch-comedy variety program "All That". During its original run, the show was seen as one and the same with Nickelodeon, achieved high ratings and is well known for introducing the network's iconic slime (usually green).
Repeats of "You Can't Do That on Television" returned to the United States after 21 years on October 5, 2015, when TeenNick aired the repeats as part of their nightly block of classic Nickelodeon programming, "The Splat".
The show is the subject of the 2004 feature-length documentary, "You Can't Do That on Film", directed by David Dillehunt. It was released in North America by Shout! Factory.
History.
Local television.
"You Can't Do That on Television" debuted on 3 February 1979 on CJOH-TV in Ottawa as a one-hour, low-budget variety program with some segments performed live. The show consisted of comedy skits, music videos (usually three per episode) and live phone-in contests in which the viewer could win a variety of prizes (transistor radios, record albums, model kits, etc.). The format also included performances by local disco dancers and special guests such as British Ottawa-based cartoonist Jim Unger. Every week the show took its "Roving Camera" to hangouts around town, recording kids' jokes or complaints about life, which would be played on the following week's broadcast. The show also made several tie-ins with Ottawa radio station CFGO, then a popular Top 40 music outlet (now a sports-talk station), including having one of the station's personalities, Jim Johnson, emcee the disco dance segments and share tidbits about the artists featured in the music videos played on the show.
Veteran comedy actor Les Lye played numerous recurring characters and was initially the only adult to perform in the show's sketches; he was also the only actor to appear for the entire length of the series run. (Actress Abby Hagyard, who played "Mom" opposite Lye's role as "Dad", would not join the cast until 1982.) Occasionally the older children in the cast (such as Christine McGlade, Sarah West or Cyndi Kennedy) played adult characters.
The show was meant to offer a program for children on Saturday mornings that made no attempt to be an educational program. The idea was successful, as (according to one episode) the show scored a 32 share of the ratings for CJOH in its 10:30 a.m. Saturday time slot. The studio masters for the first season episodes no longer exist, and thus all but three of the episodes from this season were believed lost forever until early 2013, when copies of the missing episodes from that season were contributed by Roger Price and posted on YouTube.
National television in Canada.
After a successful first season, a national network version of the program entitled Whatever Turns You On was produced for CTV and debuted in September 1979 (having already aired an hour-long pilot episode in May). The format was shortened to a half-hour, removed local content, added a laugh track and replaced music videos with live performances from popular Canadian artists at the time, including Trooper, Max Webster, Ian Thomas and disco singer Alma Faye Brooks. Ruth Buzzi joined the cast playing many of the adult female characters, mostly notably a strict schoolteacher named Miss Fitt, and the studio secretary Miss Take. In addition, twenty-two children from the first season were whittled down to seven: Christine "Moose" McGlade, Lisa Ruddy, Jonothan Gebert, Kevin Somers, Kevin Schenk, Rodney Helal, and Marc Baillon (another first-season cast member, Elizabeth Mitchell, only appeared in the pilot episode). The show was placed in the 7:00 pm time slot on Tuesday nights, and had poor ratings as a result; in addition, some CTV affiliates opted not to carry the show, possibly due to content. As a result, CTV cancelled the show in December 1979 after only 13 episodes.
In January 1981, production on "YCDTOTV" resumed, and a new batch of episodes aired locally on CJOH through May of that year. The format of the 1981 episodes as aired on CJOH was similar to that of the inaugural 1979 season, with the differences being that each show featured skits revolving around a certain topic (something that carried over from "Whatever Turns You On") and that the disco dancers were replaced by video game competitions. The season proper ended in May, but cast members were asked to come back in May and June 1981 to film some additional scenes for the syndicated version of the show (including re-writes or re-shoots of already-filmed sketches to filter out Ottawa-centric or Canada-centric content). At the time the season ended, it was uncertain whether the show would continue. In the meantime, some "YCDTOTV" cast members continued to hone their on-camera skills through appearances in "Bear Rapids", a Price/Darby pilot film that was never picked up, and "Something Else", a local game show on CJOH with a format somewhat similar to the live and local episodes of "YCDTOTV".
Four of the hour-long CJOH episodes from the 1981 season ("Strike Now", "Sexual Equality", "Crime and Vandalism", and "Peer Pressure") are available for public viewing on YouTube. The rest are only currently available in the half-hour edits.
Nickelodeon.
Peak years.
In 1981, the new American youth-oriented cable network, Nickelodeon, took an interest in "YCDTOTV". Nickelodeon originally aired a handful of episodes in edited half-hour form during 1981 as a test run, since producer Roger Price and director Geoffrey Darby had edited the entire 1981 season of "You Can't Do That on Television" episodes into a half-hour format similar to "Whatever Turns You On" for national and international syndication. Toward the beginning of 1982, Nickelodeon began airing the entire edited season and "YCDTOTV" quickly became their highest rated show.
Production on new episodes of "YCDTOTV" resumed full-time in 1982, with all episodes from that point onward made in the half-hour all-comedy format. Beginning with the 1982 season, Nickelodeon and CJOH became production partners on "YCDTOTV". Over the next few years, the ratings gradually declined in Canada (by 1985, it was seen only once a week in a Saturday-morning time slot on CTV), but "YCDTOTV" continued to go strong in the U.S. on Nickelodeon, where it aired first five times a week and, eventually, every day. Not until 1989 did the series finally get similar exposure in Canada, when it was added by YTV.
Viewers in the U.S. made slime and water sounds with their mouths and sending in their own entries for the Slime-In, a contest hosted by Nickelodeon that flew the winner to the set of "You Can't Do That on Television" to be slimed (which was later replicated by Canada's YTV, with their version being called the Slime Light Sweepstakes).
In 1983, Roger Price created a clone of "YCDTOTV" for the U.S. PBS public television network, titled "Don't Look Now" (originally to be titled "Don't Tell Your Mother!"), which was made at WGBH-TV in Boston. The show was similar in format to the 1979 season of "YCDTOTV", including the showing of music videos and the recycling of several early "YCDTOTV" skits and motifs (including a variation on the show's trademark green slime gag called "Yellow Yuck"). Despite high ratings, the series never continued past its initial five-episode trial run in October 1983, possibly due to complaints from parents for its content, and by Nickelodeon for concerns the "YCDTOTV" would continue and that the success of "Don't Look Now", and if had it not been cancelled may have spelled the end of "YCDTOTV". The series was believed lost forever until all five episodes surfaced in early 2013, and have been posted on YouTube as well but with the music videos edited out.
Roger Price created another show for Nickelodeon, the less successful "Turkey Television", in 1985, which used several key cast members of "YCDTOTV", including Les Lye, Christine McGlade, Kevin Kubusheskie and Adam Reid. By this time, Christine, now well into her twenties, had moved to Toronto and was flying back to Ottawa for "YCDTOTV" taping sessions. "Turkey Television" also marked Christine's debut as a producer, a career with which she would continue after leaving "YCDTOTV" in 1986. Another Price production using "YCDTOTV" cast members, "UFO Kidnapped", had been made in 1983. Although the pilot aired on Nickelodeon, the series was not picked up.
Changing of the guard and controversies.
By 1987, many of the "veteran" cast members such as Matt Godfrey, Doug Ptolemy, Vanessa Lindores, and Adam Reid had grown too old for the show. Longtime hostess Christine McGlade ("Moose") had departed the previous year, as had Alasdair Gillis (who had been promoted to co-host with Moose in 1985 before leaving towards the end of the 1986 season); Lisa Ruddy ("Motormouth"), Moose's longtime sidekick on the show, was also gone, having left at the end of the 1985 season. Only five episodes were filmed in this season, the shortest season of "You Can't Do That on Television"s 15-year span on the air (tied with 1990, which also lasted only five episodes), and one of the episodes ("Adoption") proved so controversial that it was banned after being shown twice (a "DO NOT AIR" sticker was reportedly placed on the master tape at CJOH). ("Adoption") is the only episode that was banned in the U.S. In Canada, the "Divorce" episode was banned, but the "Adoption" episode was shown with one part cut: in the sketch where Senator Prevert calls the adoption agency to send his son Adam back after using him to do chores all day, the part where Senator Prevert calls the adoption agency officer a "damn bureaucrat" after learning that "Adoption is forever" was bleeped out.
In addition, Nickelodeon had removed the half-hour edits of the 1981 episodes of "You Can't Do That on Television" from its daily time slot rotation, along with the 1982 "Cosmetics" episode. The 1981 episodes were supposed to air for the last time ever during a week-long promotion in 1985 called "Oldies But Moldies", which featured contests where Nickelodeon viewers could win prizes like "tasty, fresh chocolate syrup". However, the episodes continued to air until the end of 1987 but were not played very often. Reportedly, this was because Nickelodeon's six-year contract to air the 1981 season expired in 1987, and since Nickelodeon was beginning to aim for a younger demographic and many of the 1981 episodes dealt with topics more relevant to adolescents (such as smoking, drugs, sexual equality, and peer pressure); the network opted not to renew the contract. Allegedly, Nickelodeon removed the "Cosmetics" episode from rotation for the latter reason as well (although the "Addictions" episode from that same season was not dropped). By contrast, when Canada's YTV began airing the series in 1989, they continued airing the 1981 season as part of the package, as well as "Whatever Turns You On", which was never shown in the United States at all.
Final years.
Roger Price moved to France following production of the 1987 season, after being informed that Nickelodeon was not planning to order more episodes, and production was suspended. When Price eventually returned to Canada, he wanted to resume production of "You Can't Do That on Television" from the city of Toronto, but was convinced by the cast and crew to return to Ottawa and CJOH. Nickelodeon ordered more "YCDTOTV" episodes for the 1989 season, and auditions were held at CJOH in the spring of 1988 with taping beginning that fall. The only child cast members to make the transition from 1987 to 1989 were Amyas Godfrey and Andrea Byrne, although a few minor cast members seen in 1986, including Rekha Shah and James Tung, returned for an episode or two.
Opinions on the 1989 and 1990 episodes of "YCDTOTV" are mixed among longtime fans of the show, particularly regarding the new episodes' increasing reliance on bathroom humour to attract a younger audience than the show had targeted in years past. In any case, the show did not completely sever ties to its past, as many former cast members reappeared during the 1989 season in cameo roles, most notably in the "Age" episode, which was hosted by Vanessa Lindores and also featured cameos by Doug Ptolemy, Alasdair Gillis, Christine McGlade, and Kevin Kubusheskie (who by that time had become a stage producer on the show). Gillis also appeared briefly in the "locker jokes" segment during the "Fantasies" episode, and Adam Reid, who by this time had become an official writer for "YCDTOTV", also appeared (and was slimed) at the very end of the episode "Punishment".
The show's ratings declined throughout 1989 and 1990, ranking fifth on Nickelodeon. The network's desire to produce more of its own shows at its new studios at Universal Studios in Orlando, Florida, coupled with the poor ratings, caused production of "You Can't Do That on Television" to officially end in 1990 after only five episodes were made (tying 1990 with 1987 as the shortest season of the series). Though ratings declined, Nickelodeon continued to air reruns until January 1994, at which point it was only being aired on weekends.
On October 5, 2015, Nickelodeon sister network TeenNick brought the show back in reruns as the first program on The Splat, its expanded retro block. The airings began with the first two 1981 episodes, "Work" and "Transportation," marking the first time those episodes had aired on U.S. television in thirty years.
International airings.
"YCDTOTV" was aired in Australia on ABC Television in the mid-1980s, beginning with 1981's "Work, Work, Work," it aired at 5:30 pm weekdays until August 1987 when the initial run ended, after its first two runs it was moved to a 7am weekday morning timeslot in 1989. It continued to run on and off on ABC Television for the next few years, mainly as a filler during the school holiday breaks until the rights expired in the early 1990s. It was very successful in Australia and it is unknown whether the Australian broadcasts included the banned Adoptions episode or the 1989-90 seasons.
The series was also seen in some European countries and reportedly in the Middle East as well (dubbed into the vernacular language), although interestingly no French-dubbed version for distribution in France or Francophone Canada is known to exist, nor were any local adaptations based on the "YCDTOTV" format known to have been made.
Reunion.
In July 2004, on what was the program's 25th anniversary, a reunion special called "Project 131" was produced at CJOH-TV starring five members of the original cast. These included Brodie Osome, Marjorie Silcoff, and Vanessa Lindores (visibly pregnant at the time), Justin Cammy and Alasdair Gillis. It was directed by David Dillehunt.
In January 2007, the special was released on YouTube. SlimeCon is also available via Amazon Video.
Trademarks.
Episodes of "YCDTOTV" included recurring gimmicks and gags. The following is a partial list.
Pre-empted shows.
At the beginning of each show aired after the 1981 season, a title card would appear featuring a parody title of a TV show, with a silly (often macabre) picture and the announcer (Les Lye) making the following announcement: "(Phony TV show) will not be seen today in order for us to bring you this (adjective in character with the picture) production." The pre-empted shows were parodies of current TV shows (e.g. "The A-Team Makes One Cup of Coffee Last Five Hours", "Hanging Out" or "Malls", 1984), movies (e.g. "Top Gun Gets Put on Latrine-Cleaning Duty", "Discipline", 1986), or other pop culture icons (e.g. "Boy George Without Make-up", "Halloween", 1984), and were often relevant to the theme of the current episode (e.g. the pre-empted show for "Safety" (1981) was "Hit and Run on Sesame Street"). The pre-empted show announcement concept was borrowed from "Saturday Night Live", which introduced their shows with similar announcements in the late 1970s. "YCDTOTV" had also preempted itself on three occasions (Television, Media, and Priorities). Additionally, "The Generation Gap" episode did not begin with a preempted episode; instead, a disclaimer read "The following program contains certain scenes which may not be suitable for mature audiences. Juvenile discretion is advised". There was no pre-emption for the "Success and Failure" episode (1989) because the producers failed to come up with a pre-empt.
Opening animation: The Children's Television Sausage Factory.
Originally created by Rand MacIvor (under Art Director John C. Galt), who was inspired by Terry Gilliam's "gilliamations", the opening animation sequence was a sequence of surreal images set to Rossini's William Tell Overture, performed in a Dixieland jazz arrangement by The National Press Club and Allied Workers Jazz Band. Though the arrangement of the theme music stayed the same throughout the entire series run (although there are subtle differences between the themes in various seasons - especially the closing themes - and "Whatever Turns You On" used a completely different theme song), the opening animation itself changed in different ways.
Opposites.
Each episode had an "opposites" segment, introduced by a visual effect of the screen flipping upside down, shifting left to fade to the next sketch, and then righting itself. Right before this happened, one of the cast would generally be giving a monologue (or several would be having a group conversation) that was interrupted by another cast member with something that would (generally) be opposite what the monologue (or dialogue) was about, all present cast would say, "It must be the introduction to the opposites", and then the inversion fade would happen; several sketches would follow that were a tongue-in-cheek reversal of the show's subject of the day, and also in which the normal principles of daily life were reversed, often with children having authority over adults or with adults encouraging children to behave badly (for example, eating sweets instead of vegetables, or wasting money on something frivolous rather than putting the money in the bank). A show on marketing, for instance, would also have a sketch or four of how "not" to market something.
Sometimes opposite sketches involved cast members "not" being hit with slime or water after saying the "trigger phrase" (see below section), as in "City Life" (1987) or "Excess" (1989). The slime or water would not fall until after the opposites were over, or sometimes not fall at all. Also, an opposite sketch in "Heroes" (1982) had Lisa Ruddy slimed for saying "I know," rather than "I don't know" (while other cast members said "I don't know" in that same sketch without anything happening to them).
A return to the show's daily subject was hallmarked by another of these inversion fades, and usually accompanied by one of the cast members saying, "Back to reality." These would sometimes occur in the middle of a sketch, resulting in the characters inverting whatever they were doing just prior to the conclusion of the sketch.
Opposite sketches were used in the inaugural season of the show on CJOH in 1979 (the first one, used in Episode Two, was submitted by a viewer), but it was not until "Whatever Turns You On" that they became an integral part of the show.
Fake commercials.
Parodies of television commercials were part of the series as early as the first season and were the subject of one full episode in 1986, but the 1982 episodes contained commercial parodies which aired in between the commercial bumpers, where real commercials would ordinarily fit. The products featured ranged from parodies of actual products (i.e. the Lotachi Lugman, a parody of the Sony Walkman) to completely fictional products (such as a fragrance called "Creme de peanut", advertised by Abby Hagyard in a blonde wig and slinky black dress). These fake commercials were cut from the shows once Nickelodeon became advertiser-supported in 1983, although the "Creme de peanut" and "Hero Cereal" spots were preserved for later "Worst of YCDTOTV" compilations.
Firing squad.
Most episodes starting in 1981 included one or more firing squad sketches, where Les Lye would play the part of a Latin American military officer with a sword in hand preparing to order a firing squad to execute one of the children actors, who were standing in front of a post. The kids would usually find a way to trick the Executioner into walking in front of the post and saying the word "fire", thus getting shot by the firing squad himself, which was a trademark, and happened almost every time.
Every scene had the same basic format.
Captain: "Ready, aim..."
Cast Member: "Wait a minute, stop the execution!"
Captain: "What is it "this" time?"
The cast member would then make some attempt to stall or stop the execution. Most of the time, the cast member would be successful; however, occasionally, Lye's character would "successfully" complete the scene. On these occasions, the scene would end with "Ready, Aimm..." and the cast member flinching, which is when the squad would fire, but it wasn't shown. The only cast members who were actually shown being shot were Kevin Sommers, Lisa Ruddy and Alisdaire Gillis.
There is also one episode in which the cast member cries out to the commander:
"Hurry up, hurry up, start the execution!" This, of course, draws the executioner's attention, and they commence fire.
Barth's Burgers.
Starting with the 1981 season, most episodes featured sketches with the kids eating at Barth's Burgery, a fast-food burger restaurant run by Barth (played by Les Lye), a chain-smoking, unpleasant, disgusting cook who used unsanitary and questionable methods of creating burgers. Most of the sketches would begin with Barth giving the kids their orders, the kids hesitant on eating their food, Barth telling them what he used as burger meat (most of the time he would say gross things like rodents, poison, various animals not fit for human consumption, used kitty litter, human body parts, etc.) and the kids growing queasy and eventually throwing up.
Most of the sketches featured the following dialogue somewhere in the scene:
Cast Member: "Who/What do you think is in the burgers?"
Barth: "Duh IIIIIIII heard that!"
Some sketches featured Barth worried about the health inspector shutting down his restaurant and telling the kids how he was going to solve the problem. On rare occasions, the kids would actually enjoy their meal and be satisfied, only to find out Barth mistakenly gave them the wrong order. Barth would demand the kids to give back their food. ("I would "never" give my customers real meat!").
In the 1981 and 1982 seasons, Barth had a worker, Zilch (played by Darryll Lucas), whom he frequently insulted and abused, often by hitting him with a pan and knocking him out cold. In the 1982 "Bullies" episode, a young Alasdair Gillis tried to show Zilch how to defend himself by clobbering him over the head with the pan, resulting in Alasdair and Barth taking turns assaulting Zilch until Zilch fell to the floor unconscious.
Locker jokes.
During the "locker jokes" segment of each episodes, cast members, standing inside school lockers with the words "You Can't Do That on Television" painted on them, would tell jokes to each other. The person telling the joke would open their locker, sticking their head out to call another cast member to tell the joke to. For the duration of the joke, those cast members would be the only ones seen with open lockers. When the punchline was delivered, there would be a laugh track and the actors would close their lockers, allowing the process to start again with different people and a different joke. This was almost certainly an homage to the well-known "joke wall" segment on "Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In." This feature of the show was also introduced during its first season in 1979 and continued until the end of the series in 1990, with the lockers themselves undergoing a few minor physical makeovers during the show's early years.
Production company.
Used in a few episodes in the first two seasons and almost every episode in later seasons, the closing credits of "You Can't Do That on Television" are followed by an announcement of the "company" that produced the program, with the name generally tying in with the episode's main subject. These announcements are given in the form of ""'You Can't Do That on Television' is a ______ production."" For example, the 1982 "Bullying" episode was a ""Black Eye"" Production; the 1984 ""Marketing"" show was a ""Can't Give It Away"" Production; the ""Divorce"" episode was a ""Split Down The Middle"" Production;""Project 131"" was a ""Changing Day"" Production; The ""Malls"" episode was a "Hang Out to Dry" production. The announcement of the production company was generally followed by one final sketch, also borrowing a concept from "Laugh-In", in which the jokes continued for a time after the credits finished rolling.
Parody.
"YCDTOTV" has been occasionally referenced on "Robot Chicken", including some of the show's trademark gags, such as locker jokes, Barth's Burgery, and green slime.
In the "Family Guy" episode "Fast Times at Buddy Cianci Jr. High", Peter Griffin is slimed after saying "I don't know," followed immediately by a still shot that is a direct reference to "YCDTOTV"'s opening sequence, with the words "You Can't Do That on Television" written in red over a man's face. A later episode of the series was titled "You Can't Do That on Television, Peter", but contained no overt references to "YCDTOTV".
Water, slime and pies.
Water.
Certain key words would result in cast members' having substances poured on them from off-camera. When someone said the word "water", "wash" or "wet", a large amount of water would mysteriously cascade onto them from above. In the early years of the show, cast members (especially Christine) were frequently nailed with pails of water physically thrown on them, but starting in 1981, this began to change to the much more mysterious motif of water falling down on the victim from above. By the 1984 season, only the word "water" led to a dousing or "watering"; the word "wet" no longer did so. This was also an homage to "Laugh-In", which featured their similar "Sock It To Me" sketches. On occasion, cast members would try to "dodge" getting hit with water by saying the word in Spanish or French, only to still get hit with water.
Slime.
Likewise, when someone said "I don't know", green slime, a gooey substance, would pour on them from above. This prank was known as being "slimed." As with waterings, the sliming gag was used in almost every episode, especially from 1982 onward (a number of 1979 and 1981 episodes featured no slime at all, and slime is known to have been used on only one episode of "Whatever Turns You On").
Green slime was a fixture of the series from the very beginning. In a Detention/Dungeon scene in the show's first episode, Tim Douglas is told NOT to pull on his chains by the principal. After he leaves, Tim does just that. A "toilet flushing" sound is heard, and the first YCDTOTV sliming occurs.
According to Geoffrey Darby in the book "Slimed! An Oral History of Nickelodeon's Golden Age", the original slime developed "by accident": Darby had originally planned for a bucket of food leftovers from the TV station's cafeteria, with water added, to be dumped on Tim, but the production of that first episode was delayed by a week, and when the time came to shoot the scene, the contents of the bucket had turned green with mold. Due to time constraints, Darby authorized the noxious, moldy mixture to be dumped on Tim anyway. Roger Price was furious when he found out, but the response from the viewing audience was positive, and so Darby and Price decided to write an entire show around the slime, the result of which was "The Green Slime Show" of March 17, 1979 (fittingly, St. Patrick' Day), in which Lisa Ruddy was the victim of six slimings (a YCDTOTV record). By this time, the slime had changed to a much more innocuous mixture of green gelatin dessert powder, flour, and water, and with that episode, the use of "I don't know" as the slime's trigger phrase was introduced.
Although the slime was usually green, other colors, such as red, blue, yellow, and even black and white, were occasionally used. 1981's "Safety First" episode, which featured white slime as part of a recurring joke in about "wearing white at night," was the first episode known to have used a slime color other than green. The most dramatic example of this was in the 1982 episode "Television," in which Christine is slimed in green, red, blue, yellow and "stripes" (green, red, blue, and yellow at once), while trying to explain about green slime to then-newcomer Vanessa Lindores. This sketch was later seen in the opening to the hit 1987 film "Fatal Attraction". In another memorable moment, the 1986 "Enemies and Paranoia" episode used the word "Free" as a trigger phrase for red slime after the studio was taken over by Russian Communists.
On the show, the recipe for the green slime was treated as a closely guarded secret, with attempts by the kids to find out the true recipe all being unsuccessful (in one episode, Ross (Les Lye) even went so far as to decoy the kids with a fake recipe), although some episodes posited revolting theories as to what the slime was really made of - one 1989 episode which dealt with smoking, for example, theorized that slime was mucus from smokers' lungs. In reality, however, the slime recipe used through most of the show's run consisted of a mixture of lime green gelatin powder, water and flour; eventually, oatmeal was added to the recipe, as was baby shampoo so that it would wash out of the actors' hair more easily. In the aforementioned 1982 episode "Television," however, Christine revealed the ingredients to the green slime, confirming all of the previously stated ingredients. In later years, the recipe consisted of simply adding green dye to a bucket of cottage cheese, which had the side effect of spoiling if left too long under hot studio lights.
Especially in the later years of the show, cast members who were slimed frequently looked upward into the slime as it was falling so that it covered their faces (the same was also true of the waterings). To avoid damage to the set from water or slime, a clear tarpaulin was placed over the main portion of the set for scenes in which an actor was to be hit with either. The tarpaulin can occasionally be seen and/or heard underneath the actors in these scenes, and in fact the loud splatter sound usually heard during a watering or sliming is due to this tarpaulin. Actors who were scripted to be slimed or have water doused on them would usually appear barefoot in the scene. Kids who were slimed were reportedly paid extra. Scenes involving slimings were the final ones taped during a recording, allowing the actors to immediately rinse off after the scene was over.
Green Slime grew to become a trademark image for Nickelodeon, which began demanding more slimings on the show as the years went on, resulting in episodes such as 1985's "Movies," in which the entire cast (save for Abby Hagyard) is slimed. They later introduced Green Slime Shampoo (marketed with the slogan "Gets you clean, won't turn you green!"), which was a frequent parting gift for contestants on Nick's popular game show "Double Dare", where slime was heavily used along with several variations such as 'gak' or 'gooze', and Mattel even sold Nickelodeon slime and gak in the 1990s. Nickelodeon's former studios in Orlando had a green slime geyser and green slime is still dumped on the host of the annual Kids Choice Awards at the end of the ceremony, and on at least one celebrity during the ceremony. It is also still used in ads showing the network's current stars getting slimed from all sides in slow motion, and is used to slime the winner at the end of the Nick game show "BrainSurge", which debuted in 2009 (slime, as well as pies, was also used as a prize, rather than a penalty, in Nickelodeon's live daily game show "Slime Time Live" in the early 2000s). 
Saying "I don't know" to get slimed was later used on Nickelodeon's show "Fanboy & Chum Chum" as the main plot of the episode "Slime Day."
Pies.
The classic slapstick pie-in-the-face gag was also frequently used on "YCDTOTV", although pie scenes were most common during the early years of the show. One whole episode, 1981's "Drugs", was constructed completely around the pie-in-the-face gag: to avoid the wrath of the censors, the episode showed the cast getting "high" by pieing themselves continuously over and over, comparing the stupidity of hitting oneself with a pie to the stupidity of taking drugs. Unlike the slime and water, pies were not triggered by any certain word or phrase.
Cast.
Over 100 child actors appeared on "YCDTOTV" between 1979 and 1990. Some of the most notable cast members included:

</doc>
<doc id="54665" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54665" title="Mixmaster anonymous remailer">
Mixmaster anonymous remailer

Mixmaster is a Type II anonymous remailer which sends messages in fixed-size packets and reorders them, preventing anyone watching the messages go in and out of remailers from tracing them. It is an implementation of a Chaumian Mix network
History.
Mixmaster was originally written by Lance Cottrell, and was maintained by Len Sassaman. Peter Palfrader is the current maintainer. Current Mixmaster software can be compiled to handle Cypherpunk messages as well; they are needed as reply blocks for nym servers.

</doc>
<doc id="54666" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54666" title="Anonymous remailer">
Anonymous remailer

An anonymous remailer is a server that receives messages with embedded instructions on where to send them next, and that forwards them without revealing where they originally came from. There are Cypherpunk anonymous remailers, Mixmaster anonymous remailers, and nym servers, among others, which differ in how they work, in the policies they adopt, and in the type of attack on anonymity of e-mail they can (or are intended to) resist. "Remailing" as discussed in this article applies to e-mails intended for particular recipients, not the general public. Anonymity in the latter case is more easily addressed by using any of several methods of anonymous publication.
Types of remailer.
There are several strategies that affect the anonymity of the handled e-mail. In general, different classes of anonymous remailers differ with regard to the choices their designers/operators have made. These choices can be influenced by the legal ramifications of operating specific types of remailers.
It must be understood that every data packet traveling on the Internet contains the node addresses (as raw IP bit strings) of both the sending and intended recipient nodes, and so no data packet can "ever" actually be anonymous at this level . In addition, all standards-based e-mail messages contain defined fields in their headers in which the source and transmitting entities (and Internet nodes as well) are required to be included. 
Some remailers change both types of address in messages they forward, and the list of forwarding nodes in e-mail messages as well, as the message passes through; in effect, they substitute 'fake source addresses' for the originals. The 'IP source address' for that packet may become that of the remailer server itself, and within an e-mail message (which is usually several packets), a nominal 'user' on that server. Some remailers forward their anonymized e-mail to still other remailers, and only after several such hops is the e-mail actually delivered to the intended address.
There are, more or less, four types of remailers:
Pseudonymous remailers.
A Pseudonymous remailer simply takes away the e-mail address of the sender, gives a pseudonym to the sender, and sends the message to the intended recipient (that can be answered via that remailer).
Cypherpunk remailers, also called Type I.
A Cypherpunk remailer sends the message to the recipient stripping away the sender address on it. One can not answer a message sent via a Cypherpunk remailer. The message sent to the remailer can usually be encrypted, and the remailer will decrypt it and send it to the recipient address hidden inside the encrypted message. In addition, it is possible to chain two or three remailers, so that each remailer can't know who is sending a message to whom. Cypherpunk remailers do not keep logs of transactions.
Mixmaster remailers, also called Type II.
In Mixmaster, you compose an email to a remailer, which is relayed through each node in the network using SMTP, until it finally arrives at your recipient. Mixmaster can only send emails one way. An email is sent anonymously to an individual, but for them to be able to respond, the reply address must be included in the body of the email. Also, Mixmaster remailers require the use of a computer program to write messages. Such programs are not supplied as a standard part of most operating systems or mail management systems.
Mixminion remailers, also called Type III.
A Mixminion remailer attempts to address the following challenges in Mixmaster remailers: replies, forward anonymity, replay prevention and key rotation, exit policies, integrated directory servers and dummy traffic. They are currently available for the Linux and Windows platforms. Some implementations are open source.
Traceable remailers.
Some remailers establish an internal list of actual senders and invented names such that a recipient can send mail to "invented name" AT "some-remailer.example". When receiving traffic addressed to this user, the server software consults that list, and forwards the mail to the original sender, thus permitting anonymous—though traceable with access to the list—two way communication. The famous "penet.fi" remailer in Finland did just that for several years. Because of the existence of such lists in this type of remailing server, it is possible to break the anonymity by gaining access to the list(s), by breaking into the computer, asking a court (or merely the police in some places) to order that the anonymity be broken, and/or bribing an attendant. This happened to penet.fi as a result of some traffic passed through it about Scientology. The Church claimed copyright infringement and sued penet.fi's operator. A court ordered the list be made available. Penet's operator shut it down after destroying its records (including the list) to retain identity confidentiality for its users; though not before being forced to supply the court with the real e-mail addresses of two of its users.
More recent remailer designs use cryptography in an attempt to provide more or less the same service, but without so much risk of loss of user confidentiality. These are generally termed nym servers or pseudonymous remailers. The degree to which they remain vulnerable to forced disclosure (by courts or police) is and will remain unclear, since new statutes/regulations and new cryptanalytic developments proceed apace. Multiple anonymous forwarding among cooperating remailers in different jurisdictions may retain, but cannot guarantee, anonymity against a determined attempt by one or more governments, or civil litigators.
Untraceable remailers.
If users accept the loss of two-way interaction, identity anonymity can be made more secure.
By not keeping any list of users and corresponding anonymizing labels for them, a remailer can ensure that any message that has been forwarded leaves no internal information behind that can later be used to break identity confidentiality. However, while being handled, messages remain vulnerable within the server (e.g., to Trojan software in a compromised server, to a compromised server operator, or to mis-administration of the server), and traffic analysis comparison of traffic into and out of such a server can suggest quite a lot—far more than almost any would credit.
The Mixmaster strategy is designed to defeat such attacks, or at least to increase their cost (i.e., to 'attackers') beyond feasibility. If every message is passed through several servers (ideally in different legal and political jurisdictions), then attacks based on legal systems become considerably more difficult, if only because of 'Clausewitzian' friction amongst lawyers, courts, different statutes, organizational rivalries, legal systems, etc. And, since many different servers and server operators are involved, subversion of any (i.e., of either system or operator) becomes less effective also since no one (most likely) will be able to subvert the entire chain of remailers.
Random padding of messages, random delays before forwarding, and encryption of forwarding information between forwarding remailers, increases the degree of difficulty for attackers still further as message size and timing can be largely eliminated as traffic analysis clues, and lack of easily readable forwarding information renders ineffective simple automated traffic analysis algorithms.
Web based mailer.
There are also web services that allow users to send anonymous e-mail messages. These services do not provide the anonymity of real remailers, but they are easier to use. When using a web-based anonymous e-mail or anonymous remailer service, its reputation should first be analyzed, since the service stands between senders and recipients. Some of the aforementioned web services log the users I.P. addresses to ensure they do not break the law; others offer superior anonymity with attachment functionality by choosing to trust that the users will not breach the websites Terms of Service (TOS).
Remailer statistics.
In most cases, remailers are owned and operated by individuals, and are not as stable as they might ideally be. In fact, remailers can, and have, gone down without warning. It is important to use up-to-date statistics when choosing remailers.
Remailer abuse and blocking by governments.
Although most re-mailer systems are used responsibly, the anonymity they provide can be exploited by entities or individuals whose reasons for anonymity are not necessarily benign.
Such reasons could include support for violent extremist actions, sexual exploitation of children or more commonly to frustrate accountability for 'trolling' and harassment of targeted individuals, or companies (The Dizum.com re-mailer chain being abused as recently as May 2013 for this purpose.)
The response of some re-mailers to this abuse potential is often to disclaim responsibility (as dizum.com does), as owing to the technical design (and ethical principles) of many systems, it is impossible for the operators to physically unmask those using their systems. Some re-mailer systems go further and claim that it would be illegal for them to monitor for certain types abuse at all.
Until technical changes were made in the remailers concerned in the mid-2000s, some re-mailers (notably nym.alias.net based systems) were seemingly willing to use any genuine (and thus valid) but otherwise forged address. This loophole allowed trolls to mis-attribute controversial claims or statements with the aim of causing offence, upset or harassment to the genuine holder(s) of the address(es) forged.
Whilst re-mailers may disclaim responsibility, the comments posted via them have led to them being blocked in some countries. In 2014 dizum.com (a Netherlands-based remailer) was seemingly blocked by authorities in Pakistan, because comments an (anonymous) user of that service had made concerning key figures in Islam.

</doc>
<doc id="54667" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54667" title="97 BC">
97 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 97 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 657 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 97 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Japan.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="54669" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54669" title="Desperate Dan">
Desperate Dan

Desperate Dan is a wild west character in the British comic magazine "The Dandy" and has become their mascot. He made his appearance in the first issue which was dated 4 December 1937. He is apparently the world's strongest man, able to lift a cow with one hand. The pillow of his (reinforced) bed is filled with building rubble and his beard is so tough he shaves with a blowtorch.
The character was created by Dudley D. Watkins, originally as an outlaw or ‘desperado’ (hence his name), but evolved into a more sympathetic type, using his strength to help the underdog. After Watkins’ death in 1969, the cartoons were drawn by many other artists, principally Ken H. Harrison, though the Watkins canon was often recycled. When the Dandy became digital-only in 2012, the Desperate Dan strips were drawn by David Parkins.
There is a statue of Dan in Dundee, Scotland, where his publishers, D. C. Thomson & Co. are based.
History.
The strip was drawn by Dudley D. Watkins until his death in 1969. Although The Dandy Annuals featured new strips from other artists from then on, the comic continued reprinting Watkins strips until 1983 (though the then Korky the Cat artist Charles Grigg drew new strips for annuals and summer specials), when it was decided to start running new strips. These were initially drawn by Peter Davidson, but Ken H. Harrison soon took over as regular artist. The following year Dan was promoted to the front cover of The Dandy, replacing Korky who had been there since issue 1. Starting from issue 2985, dated 6 February 1999, Cuddles and Dimples replaced Dan on the front cover. This didn't last long, however, as after a readers' poll in 2000, Dan returned to the cover. Although Ken Harrison was the main artist from 1983 to 2007, other artists have also occasionally filled in for Harrison, including David Parkins and Trevor Metcalfe in the early 1990s. John Geering took over the strip between 1994 and 1997, after which Harrison returned as full-time artist (though Steve Bright occasionally acted as a ghost artist as well). When the Dandy was redesigned and renamed Dandy Xtreme, the writers used reprints of the old comic strips, until Jamie Smart took over drawing and writing the Desperate Dan comic strips in April 2008. 
Characteristics.
Desperate Dan's favourite food is cow pie – a type of enormous meat pie with the horns sticking out, although the term "cow pie" has a different meaning in the American West. Much like Popeye with his spinach, Desperate Dan draws his immense power from eating these pies. Desperate Dan was voted the UK's second favourite superhero after Batman in 2011.
Initially Dan was a desperado on the wrong side of the law, hence the name "Desperate" Dan. Later on, however, he switched sides and become a friendlier character, helping the underdog. The first member of his family to appear in the strip was Aunt Aggie (issue 107, dated 16 December 1939) followed by his nephew, Danny (issue 304, dated 27 October 1945) and niece, Katey in 1957. In 2001, Desperate Dan's girlfriend Little Bear appeared; she was a native American woman, referred to by the term "squaw" (offensive in the present day in North America) but disappeared with the 2004 Dandy relaunch, when Dan's artwork style changed.
Modernisation.
With the first revamp of The Dandy (from issue 3282, 16 October 2004) Dan, though still drawn by Ken Harrison, was redesigned slightly. His eyes and chin became much bigger and exaggerated. Dan's personality was changed to that of a bumbling fool, a change to which many fans objected. He was originally going to be left out of the revamped issues, but focus group tests objected to his absence.
But, as of the "re-revamp" in August 2007, the strips became classic reprints on the back cover of Dandy Comix in The Dandy Xtreme. While the first few issues ran them in the original monochrome, they have since been run in coloured form, all reprints were adopted from the 1997 "Legend of Desperate Dan" book which was released to celebrate his 60th anniversary. For the "MegaComix Special" in February 2008, there were two Desperate Dan strips. One was the usual Dudley Watkins reprint, the other was a brand new one by Jamie Smart, who later became Dan's artist and writer for 12 issues in April 2008. The MegaComix Special also featured a guide to drawing, by Jamie Smart, which showed how he drew the Desperate Dan strip (which was over the page). This didn't actually feature, nor did the comic strip, inside the Comix pullout.
Later, in early April 2008, Jamie Smart took over writing and illustrating the Desperate Dan comic strips and changed Dan's personality into a big hearted dope who was constantly getting into trouble because of his fantastic strength. Zeke's personality was also changed into a person who loved 're-refried beans'. Danny and Katey also disappeared.
A number of spin-off strips have appeared in "The Dandy" over the years, including Desperate Dawg in the 1970s and 80s, Danny and Katey in the late 1980s and Aunt Aggie in the 2000s (before the 2004 relaunch). A statue of him (and his dog Dawg) can be found in Dundee, Scotland – The Dandy is published by D. C. Thomson & Co. who are based in Dundee.
The Digital Dandy.
After the print Dandy ended with its 75th anniversary issue (for which Ken H. Harrison returned to draw one final strip, reverting to the art style he had employed during the 1980s and 1990s), The Dandy relaunched as a digital comic. David Parkins returned to DC Thomson to draw Desperate Dan with Dan's previous artist, Jamie Smart, drawing a relaunch of The Numskulls from The Beezer.
Notes.
As with many well-known characters, the name and image of Desperate Dan have been borrowed in many contexts. A limited selection is mentioned here.

</doc>
<doc id="54670" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54670" title="The Bash Street Kids">
The Bash Street Kids

The Bash Street Kids is a comic strip in the British comic book "The Beano". The strip, created by Leo Baxendale as "When the Bell Rings", first appeared in issue 604 (dated 13 February 1954). It became "The Bash Street Kids" in 1956 and has become a regular feature, appearing in every issue. Since 1961, David Sutherland has drawn about 2,100 strips.
History.
Like many long-running UK comic strips, "The Bash Street Kids" is frozen in the era when it began. It portrays Class 2B of the Bash Street School in Beanotown, where the teacher and headmaster wear mortarboards and gowns and the students sit at wood desks with inkwells. They are taught by a stereotypical "Teacher", whose wife is "Mrs Teacher". The characters were inspired by the view from the D. C. Thomson & Co. office windows, overlooking the High School of Dundee playground. According to Leo Baxendale, "In fact, the catalyst for my creation of Bash Street was a Giles cartoon of January 1953: kids pouring out of school, heads flying off and sundry mayhems. Straight away, I pencilled a drawing of 'The Kids of Bash Street School' and posted it from my home in Preston to R. D. Low, the managing editor of D.C. Thomson's children's publications in Dundee. I received an offhand response, a dampener. It was only after I'd created Little Plum (April 1953) and Minnie the Minx (September 1953) that the Beano editor George Moonie travelled to Preston on 20 October 1953 and asked me to go ahead with Bash Street (he gave it the provisional title of 'When The Bell Goes'; when it appeared in The Beano in February 1954, it was titled 'When The Bell Rings')." Over time, the Bash Street School's large number of students slowly shrank to its trademark ten. When they first appeared, the strips consisted of the kids outside school; the settings were increasingly inside the school, and the strip was retitled "The Bash Street Kids" on 11 November 1956 with "the kids" preparing for a pantomime.
In 1994 (the Kids' 40th anniversary), it was announced that "The Bash Street Kids" would be overhauled to appeal to a more politically correct, modern audience. Changes included the replacement of Danny's trademark school hat by a top hat, Fatty becoming fit and muscular and Tom-boy Toots acting more feminine. The school would be replaced by a technologically advanced "academy", and Teacher by a robot. A protest began, accompanied by petitions and publicity stunts throughout Britain, demanding that the characters remain the same. The proposal turned out to be a hoax when the story introducing the new Bash Street Kids saw them in their old ways. Editor Euan Kerr was pleased with the fan response, saying that the publication "even got death threats!" Shortly afterwards, an animated adaptation was produced as a segment of "The Beano Video Stars".
By 2000 "The Bash Street Kids" was a feature-length strip, filling an entire "Beano" book. Often drawn by Mike Pearce and Kev F. Sutherland, during the late 2000s the strips moved to "Beano" sister publication "BeanoMAX" (where they were drawn by Nigel Parkinson). These feature-length strips were more detailed, delving into an obscure character's personality and introducing new traits. Spotty was revealed as sarcastic and aggressive, while Plug was a more sympathetic, emotional character. The strips detailed a rivalry between the kids and the comic's cover star, Dennis the Menace. Mike Pearce soon began penciling a spin-off from the original strip, "The Bash Street Kids – Singled Out", a single-page comic concentrating on one "kid" a week. Pearce retired, the strips were taken over by Tom Paterson before being mothballed and they were later collected into two annuals.
As Dennis the Menace was revamped, he appeared less with other "Beano" characters and more by himself due to the popularity of his new TV series. "The Bash Street Kids" now has three spin-offs: "Simply Smiffy", "Winston" and "The Bash Street Burp". In the July 2013 "Beano" 75th-birthday edition, the Bash Street School is destroyed and the kids move to Beano High.
Characters.
The strip centres around Class 2B, which contains ten students.
Danny.
Danny, whose full name is Daniel Deathshed Morgan, is generally depicted in a skull and crossbones jumper and a floppy red school cap. He became the leader early in the strip, after he gave each kid a wine gum. Danny often devises the kids' pranks and escape routes from school. Although he is clever he does poorly in school, primarily due to his laziness and short attention span. Danny is often described as having the "soul of a pirate", the reason he gets caught up in rebellious schemes and boisterous activities. Like most of the other characters he is usually rude to adults, once asking Smiffy to speak up because he couldn't hear him over Teacher. In later strips Danny has some respect for Teacher, often helping him out of trouble. Although he hates school, like the other children he found it hard to cope when the Bash Street School was closed. As the leader Danny is prone to conceit, and in the 2006 "Beano" annual he announces that his conker is indestructible in a competition. His swelled head is often deflated by a fellow student.
Danny seems especially close to Toots, calling her his second-in-command, and is most annoyed by Smiffy's stupidity and Spotty's sarcasm. He occasionally enjoys making fun of Plug's looks and Fatty's weight. Danny has an intense rivalry with Dennis the Menace, highlighted in a strip where the two compete to find a treasure under The O2 Arena and ending with Danny outwitting Dennis; they often argue in crossover strips. Although Danny also dislikes Roger the Dodger (although he is willing to use him) and Minnie the Minx, their rivalries are not as intense and he once had a crush on Minnie. He is a central character in "The Beano Interactive DVD" with Dennis, Gnasher, Minnie the Minx and Roger the Dodger.
'Erbert.
'Erbert is a short-sighted boy, who struggles to see even with his spectacles. Except for Cuthbert, the rest of the class have fun swapping his thick-rimmed glasses with others and seeing the resultant mayhem. In older strips, the character is sometimes called Herbert instead of 'Erbert. 'Erbert is considered the least-mischievous student, and is said to resemble a human mole. His short-sightedness is shared by his parents, who have ended up in different parts of town on many parents' evenings. During an escape, 'Erbert is usually bumping into a wall or running in the opposite direction.
Feature-length strips and crossovers brand most of 'Erbert's mischief as accidental or the result of misdirection. His short-sightedness is renowned; in "The Beano Annual 2000" the characters take a cruise to Perth, only to reach shore at Perth, Scotland. When they go to the captain's quarters, they discover that 'Erbert has put himself in charge of the ship.
Although he is quiet and friendly, 'Erbert can wreak as much havoc as his classmates. He is a source of entertainment for the others; Sidney and Spotty once send him into a field full of cow pats, with misleading directions for getting out. Despite this, they consider him "one of the kids". When he moves to the Bash Street Academy 'Erbert receives contact lenses to improve his sight, discarding them when he returns to his old school.
Fatty.
Fatty's real name is Frederick Brown. A large, round boy who is always eating, only in later strips is he ridiculed for his weight; he usually reacts by trying to prove the others wrong, but earlier he is indifferent. When Danny tricks Fatty into completing a long assault course to prove his fitness, he breaks the equipment. Although he is usually the only student able to eat school cook Olive's meals without incident, in the 2009 annual her curry makes him ill. Fatty has several stories about him in the Beano Library series. In the academy makeover, he has slimmed down, but regains his former girth after being freed from brainwashing.
Plug.
Plug is a lanky, gangling character with a large overbite, two buck teeth and a wide nose. On the cover of "Plug" his name is given as Percival Proudfoot Plugsey, although in some earlier strips he is named Claude. Plug's real name is only occasionally used in "The Beano", such as in "Singled Out" when Teacher addresses him by his full name. He is originally known as Pug; according to "The Beano", the "l" was added when Smiffy had one to spare after misspelling "silly".
Despite his appearance Plug is one of the more sympathetic Bash Street Kids, often ready to defend those he feels have been unjustly treated; he once calms Danny down after he loses patience with Smiffy's stupidity. He has on one occasion fainted from seeing his own reflection (after polishing the handles of Teacher's bicycle), and considers himself the most handsome boy in Beanotown.
Plug had his own comic from 1977 to 1979 featuring him and his two pets (Pug from Pup Parade and Chunkee the Monkey), and was the first Beano with a spin-off. "Plug" was later incorporated into "The Beezer". 
He has two sisters, Plugella and Plugena, who closely resemble him. However, in earlier strips his father was shown to be quite handsome (to the confusion of the other kids) and Plug is described as taking after his mother in appearance. In the September 2014 issue of "The Beano" he is described as Jonah's nephew, implying that he is the son of Jonah's sister Jinx.
With Kev F. Sutherland Plug had a more dominant role and was frequently a story's main character. In one he has a girlfriend, making him the first Beano character (except for Walter) to do so.
Although Plug received plastic surgery for the Bash Street Academy makeover, he soon returned to his familiar appearance. When he sees his friends brainwashed into behaving, he saves them by installing a virus on the robot teacher's disc drive.
Sidney.
Sidney Pye is Toots' twin brother, whose spiked haircut resembles a chimney-sweeping brush. He is a trickster, with Smiffy a frequent target. When the kids rehearse a nativity play, Smiffy asks what sound a sheep makes. Sidney replies "Woof", and he and Wilfred go into hysterics when Smiffy ruins the rehearsal. He makes pithy remarks about the other kids, to the amusement of those around him; he and Spotty fight several times when the latter is a target.
Sidney loves animals and has a wide variety of pets, from elephants to mice. His mouse is often part of the kids' plans. During the academy makeover, his chimney-brush hair is shaved off and he is apparently hypnotised.
Smiffy.
Smiffy is the learning disabled boy in the class; when Teacher calls the roll, instead of saying "Present, sir" he says "Gift, miss". Although he is sometimes very kind and intuitive (similar to a savant), most of the time he cannot remember what colour the sky is. In his brief involvement in "The Wizard", he is given the name John Smith. Smiffy has appeared in two spin-off strips: the 1971–72 "Says Smiffy" and the 1985–87 "Simply Smiffy" (where he appears with his brother, Normal Norman). In 2008 he acquires a pet pebble, Kevin, who has his own feature ("Where's Kevin?") in "The Beano" number 3604. First appearing in a 2008 "Singled Out" story, Kevin appears in "Bash Street Kids" stories in 2010 and 2011. In the academy makeover Smiffy has a new brain installed, making him the brightest of the kids.
Spotty.
Spotty is a short boy who wears a blue collared jersey and an extremely long, striped tie. He is proud and protective of the 976 black spots covering his face, fending off any attempts to remove them. Teacher sees him as the mouthiest of the kids; in "Singled Out" and feature-length strips, he interrupts the lessons with comments. Spotty is sarcastic, conceited and protective about his masculinity and height. Like Danny he dislikes Dennis the Menace, especially after Dennis menaces him during the latter's 50th-birthday party. In the academy makeover, Spotty's spots and aggressive, sarcastic nature are gone.
Toots.
Toots Pye, Sidney's twin sister, is the only girl in Class 2B. Although she is a tomboy, she is more feminine than Minnie the Minx. Toots is a fan of boy bands and has admitted a crush on Dennis the Menace, sending him a valentine. Although most of the kids dislike Dennis, her friendship with Minnie the Minx is also surprising and she is the only kid to show any warmth to either character.
Surprisingly tough and as bossy as Danny, Toots is the gang's second-in-command and takes charge in Danny's absence. Her bossiness is exemplified in the feature-length "Queen Toots", where she discovers she is connected to royalty. When Toots takes advantage of her power, Dennis announces that she cannot boss him around and she puts him in a makeshift prison tower (quickly populated by other "Beano" characters and the rest of the kids). She loves music, often pulling a "boogie box" (a CD player) behind her or listening to her headphones instead of Teacher.
Although Toots enjoys the boys' company, she sometimes exhibits disdain, naivete or exasperation at their more boyish behaviour. In the academy makeover, she wears a frilly dress and her hair and face are made up.
Wilfred.
Wilfred is the smallest and quietest of the Bash Street Kids, and has social anxiety, his thoughts hidden behind a green jumper going up to his nose. He loves turtles, and resembles a tortoise; his neck is never seen, because when he removes his jumper his vest is just as high.
He is often simply present in the stories, speaking only occasionally. Unlike 'Erbert, most of Wilfred's mischief is intentional. He hangs around most often with Spotty and 'Erbert and, occasionally, Sidney. In the academy storyline Wilfred apparently has a large chin under his jersey, but it is prosthetic and he pulls it off.
Cuthbert.
Cuthbert Cringeworthy, the brightest student in the class, is a teacher's pet and has a name for every letter of the alphabet. First appearing in 1972, he resembles a miniature Teacher (a play on the D. C. Thomson comic tradition that pets resemble their owners, like Dennis the Menace and Gnasher) and Walter the Softy from "Dennis the Menace". The first thing Danny said about Cuthbert was, "He reminds me of someone I don't particularly like". His character has evolved slightly; although he still swots and is as bright as ever, particularly in longer strips by Mike Pearse and Kev F. Sutherland he is one of the gang (unlike earlier strips, where he seemed to dislike the other kids) and sometimes comes up with intelligent ideas to help their cause or save the school. Cuthbert wants to be like the other kids, but although he is liked he does not quite fit in. The school janitor observes that he will never make any friends. Cuthbert is the only kid who wears the school uniform and turns in homework. A school-dance strip hints at a crush on Toots, but she quickly rejects him. Cuthbert appears in the fewest strips of all the characters.
Other characters.
An eleventh pupil, Wayne, was introduced after a competition on the BBC's "Blue Peter" to find a new Bash Street Kid. The winning entry was announced on 14 March 2007 as "Wayne's in pain". Wayne has fat, puffy cheeks, dandelion-like hair, a problem with standing and is talkative. He wears a plaster cast and sling, suffering comic misfortunes like Calamity James. After a year, Wayne disappeared.
Some characters (Teacher and Head, for example) are named after their occupations. The children's parents (who look almost exactly like their children) are called Plug's Dad and so on, even in flashbacks to "their" childhoods.
In the early years, there were an indeterminate number of students; one page had 28, including:
The characters appeared in one-page stories (not comic strips) entitled "Bash St. School" in "The Wizard" in 1955, and were the full-page cover cartoon on 23 July 1955.
Artists.
Leo Baxendale drew the strip until 1962, when David Sutherland replaced him. Sutherland originally used a similar drawing style to Baxendale's, simplifying it later in the decade. He has drawn most of the strips since then, except from 1998 to 2000 (when Nigel Parkinson took over the strip in a style similar to that of David Parkins in "Dennis the Menace". The strips have had a closely connected visual style since the early 1970s, when Sutherland began drawing them both. Although he was apparently easing into semi-retirement, Parkinson moved to "Dennis the Menace" in 2000 and Sutherland returned.
The strip has had a number of ghost artists, including Gordon Bell during the early 1970s, John Sherwood later in the decade, Keith Reynolds during the 1980s and Tom Paterson in the early 1990s. Mike Pearse and Kev F. Sutherland (no relation to David Sutherland) have occasionally drawn the strip, long stories in particular.
Spin-offs and other appearances.
"The Bash Street Kids" has had a number of spin-offs, including "Pup Parade", "Simply Smiffy", "Plug" and "Singled Out". "The Bash Street Kids Annual", previously known as "The Bash Street Kids Book" and published biannually, is published in August. Summer specials, with solo stories of each character, were also published during the 1990s and were a forerunner to "Singled Out". Most were drawn by Tom Paterson, who later drew the "Singled Out" strip.
From 1968 to 1972 "The Beano" ran a similar series, "The Belles of St. Lemons".
"The Dandy" has had two similar series: the 1970s "Whacko" (about a teacher who taught in a suit of armour because of his unruly pupils) and "P5" from 1998 to 2000, also about a class and their long-suffering teacher. "P5" was republished in 2006 as "Class Act".
In other media.
Video.
The Bash Street Kids appear in the late-1990s "Beano Video". They make a brief appearance in "The Beano Video-Stars", singing two songs: "The Beano Rap" and "We're the Kids From Bash Street School".
Theme parks.
Before Beanoland became Wild Asia at the Chessington World of Adventures, it included the Bash Street Bus. The kids were also featured in the water-balloon portion of the park, and their standees were posted at a number of locations.
Video games.
Plug is a playable character in "Beanotown Racing" for the PC, and the school is a race track.
Toys and games.
Robert Harrop has designed figures, statues and ornaments based on "The Bash Street Kids". A target-practice game featured the characters, and a McDonald's Happy Meal toy set included a number of the kids.

</doc>
<doc id="54673" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54673" title="Early infanticidal childrearing">
Early infanticidal childrearing

Early infanticidal childrearing is a term used in the study of psychohistory that refers to infanticide in paleolithic, pre-historical, and historical hunter-gatherer tribes or societies. "Early" means early in history or in the cultural development of a society, not to the age of the child. "Infanticidal" refers to the high incidence of infants killed when compared to modern nations. The model was developed by Lloyd deMause within the framework of psychohistory as part of a seven-stage sequence of childrearing modes that describe the development attitudes towards children in human cultures The word "early" distinguishes the term from late infanticidal childrearing, identified by deMause in the more established, agricultural cultures up to the ancient world.
The model.
This model is a psychological concept that aims to understand anthropological data, especially from such societies as the Yolngu of Australia, the Gimi, Wogeo, Bena Bena, and Bimin-Kuskusmin of Papua New Guinea, the Raum, the Ok, and the Kwanga, based on observations by Géza Róheim, Lia Leibowitz, Robert C. Suggs, Milton Diamond, Herman Heinrich Ploss, Gilbert Herdt, Robert J. Stoller, L. L. Langness, and Fitz John Porter Poole, among others. While anthropologists and psychohistorians do not dispute the data, they dispute its significance in terms of its importance, its meaning, and its interpretation.
Supporters attempt to explain cultural history from a psycho-developmental point of view, and argue that cultural change can be assessed as "advancement" or "regression" based on the psychological consequences of various cultural practices. While most anthropologists reject this approach and most theories of cultural evolution as ethnocentric, psychohistorians proclaim the independence of psychohistory and reject the mainstream Boasian view.
This "infanticidal" model makes several claims: that childrearing in tribal societies included child sacrifice or high infanticide rates, incest, body mutilation, child rape, and tortures, and that such activities were culturally acceptable. Psychohistorians do not claim that each child was killed, only that in some societies there was (or is) a selection process that would vary from culture to culture. For example, there is a large jump in the mortality rate of Papua New Guinean children after they reach the weaning stage. In the Solomon Islands some people reportedly kill their first-born child. In rural India, rural China, and other societies, some female babies have been exposed to death. DeMause's argument is that the surviving siblings of the sacrificed child may become disturbed.
Some states, both in the Old World and New World, practiced infanticide, including sacrifice in Mesoamerica and in Assyrian and Canaanite religions. Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and other members of early states sacrificed infants to their gods, as described in the table of the psychopathological effects of some forms of childrearing.
According to deMause, in the most primitive mode of childrearing of the above-mentioned table, mothers use their children to project parts of their dissociated self onto their children. The infanticidal clinging of the symbiotic mother prevents individuation so that innovation and more complex political organization are inhibited. On a second plane, supporters maintain that the attention paid by mothers of contemporary primitive tribes to their children, such as sucking, fondling, and masturbating, is sexual according to an objective standard; and that this sexual attention is inordinate.
The model is based on a reported lack of empathy by infanticidal parents, such as a lack of mutual gazes between parent and child, observed by Robert B. Edgerton, Maria Lepowsky, Bruce Knauft, John W. M. Whiting, and Margaret Mead, among others. Such mutual gazing is widely recognized in developmental psychology as crucial for proper bonding between mother and child.
Criticism.
Nineteenth-century British anthropology advanced a lineal, evolutionary sequence in a given culture from savagery to civilization. Cultures were seen on a hierarchical ladder. James George Frazer posited a universal progress from magical thinking to science. Most anthropologists of the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century studied primitive cultures outside Europe and North America. John Ferguson McLennan, Lewis Henry Morgan, and others argued that there was a parallel development in social institutions. In the 1950s, led by Leslie White, these evolutionist ideas gained influence in American anthropology.
The German-born Franz Boas managed to shift the paradigm. His approach, later named cultural relativism, resists universal values of any kind. According to Boas's principle, which represents the mainstream school in contemporary anthropology, a culture's beliefs and activities should be interpreted in terms of its own culture. This principle has been established as axiomatic in contemporary anthropology. The Vietnam War consolidated the Boasian shift in American anthropology.
Since the psychohistorians' model is analogous to the now discarded unilineal evolution theory, anthropologists have been critical of the negative value judgments, and the lineal progression, in the model currently advanced by psychohistorians as to what constitutes child abuse in primitive or non-Western cultures. Melvin Konner wrote:
Lloyd deMause, then editor of the "History of Childhood Quarterly", claimed that all past societies treated children brutally, and that all historical change in their treatment has been a fairly steady improvement toward the kind and gentle standards we now set and more or less meet. [...] Now anthropologists — and many historians as well — were slack-jawed and nearly speechless. [...] Serious students of the anthropology of childhood beginning with Margaret Mead have called attention to the pervasive love and care lavished on children in many traditional cultures.
Psychohistorians accuse anthropologists and ethnologists of having avoided looking more closely at the evidence and having promulgated the myth of the noble savage. They maintain that what constitutes child abuse is a matter of a general psychological law, it leaves its permanent marks on the human brain structure, post-traumatic stress disorder is not a culture dependent phenomenon or a matter of opinion, and that some of the practices that mainstream anthropologists do not focus on, such as beatings of newborn infants, result in brain lesions and other visible neurological and psychological damage.
Notes.
<br>

</doc>
<doc id="54675" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54675" title="Basilica">
Basilica

The Latin word basilica (derived from Greek βασιλικὴ στοά, Royal "Stoa", the tribunal chamber of a king) has three distinct applications in modern English. The word was originally used to describe an ancient Roman public building where courts were held, as well as serving other official and public functions. To a large extent these were the town halls of ancient Roman life. The basilica was centrally located in every Roman town, usually adjacent to the main forum. These buildings, an example of which is the Basilica Ulpia, were rectangular, and often had a central nave and aisles, usually with a slightly raised platform and an apse at each of the two ends, adorned with a statue perhaps of the emperor, while the entrances were from the long sides.
By extension the name was applied to Christian churches which adopted the same basic plan and it continues to be used as an architectural term to describe such buildings, which form the majority of church buildings in Western Christianity, though the basilican building plan became less dominant in new buildings from the later 20th century. Later, the term came to refer specifically to a large and important Roman Catholic church that has been given special ceremonial rights by the Pope.
Roman Catholic basilicas are Catholic pilgrimage sites, receiving tens of millions of visitors per year. In December 2009 the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe set a new record with 6.1 million pilgrims during Friday and Saturday for the anniversary of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Architecture.
The Roman basilica was a large public building where business or legal matters could be transacted. The first basilicas had no religious function at all. As early as the time of Augustus, a public basilica for transacting business had been part of any settlement that considered itself a city, used in the same way as the late medieval covered market houses of northern Europe, where the meeting room, for lack of urban space, was set "above" the arcades, however. Although their form was variable, basilicas often contained interior colonnades that divided the space, giving aisles or arcaded spaces on one or both sides, with an apse at one end (or less often at each end), where the magistrates sat, often on a slightly raised dais. The central aisle tended to be wide and was higher than the flanking aisles, so that light could penetrate through the clerestory windows.
The oldest known basilica, the Basilica Porcia, was built in Rome in 184 BC by Cato the Elder during the time he was Censor. Other early examples include the basilica at Pompeii (late 2nd century BC).
Probably the most splendid Roman basilica (see below) is the one begun for traditional purposes during the reign of the pagan emperor Maxentius and finished by Constantine I after 313 AD.
Palace basilicas.
In the Imperial period, a basilica for large audiences also became a feature in the palaces. In the 3rd century AD, the governing elite appeared less easily in the forums.They now tended to dominate their cities from opulent palaces and country villas, set a little apart from traditional centers of public life. Rather than retreats from public life, however, these residences were the forum made private.(Peter Brown, in Paul Veyne, 1987)Seated in the tribune of his basilica, the great man would meet his dependent "clientes" early every morning.
A private basilica excavated at Bulla Regia (Tunisia), in the "House of the Hunt", dates from the first half of the 5th century. Its reception or audience hall is a long rectangular nave-like space, flanked by dependent rooms that mostly also open into one another, ending in a semi-circular apse, with matching transept spaces. The "crossing" of the two axes was emphasised with clustered columns.
Christian adoption of the basilica form.
The remains of a large subterranean Neopythagorean basilica dating from the 1st century AD were found near the Porta Maggiore in Rome in 1915. The ground-plan of Christian basilicas in the 4th century was similar to that of this Neopythagorean basilica, which had three naves and an apse.
In the 4th century, once the Imperial authorities had decriminalised Christianity with the 313 Edict of Milan, and with the activities of Constantine the Great and his mother Helena, Christians were prepared to build larger and more handsome edifices for worship than the furtive meeting-places (such as the Cenacle, cave-churches, house churches such as that of the Roman consuls John and Paul) they had been using. Architectural formulas for temples were unsuitable, for their pagan associations, and because pagan cult ceremonies and sacrifices occurred outdoors under the open sky in the sight of the gods, with the temple, housing the cult figures and the treasury, as a backdrop. The usable model at hand, when Constantine wanted to memorialise his imperial piety, was the familiar conventional architecture of the basilicas.
There were several variations of the basic plan of the secular basilica, always some kind of rectangular hall, but the one usually followed for churches had a central nave with one aisle at each side and an apse at one end opposite to the main door at the other end. In, and often also in front of, the apse was a raised platform, where the altar was placed, and from where the clergy officiated. In secular building this plan was more typically used for the smaller audience halls of the emperors, governors, and the very rich than for the great public basilicas functioning as law courts and other public purposes. Constantine built a basilica of this type in his palace complex at Trier, later very easily adopted for use as a church. It is a long rectangle two storeys high, with ranks of arch-headed windows one above the other, without aisles (there was no mercantile exchange in this imperial basilica) and, at the far end beyond a huge arch, the apse in which Constantine held state. 
Development.
Putting an altar instead of the throne, as was done at Trier, made a church. Basilicas of this type were built in western Europe, Greece, Syria, Egypt, and Palestine, that is, at any early center of Christianity. Good early examples of the architectural basilica include the Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem (6th century AD), the church of St Elias at Thessalonica (5th century AD), and the two great basilicas at Ravenna.
The first basilicas with transepts were built under the orders of Emperor Constantine, both in Rome and in his "New Rome", Constantinople:
Thus, a Christian symbolic theme was applied quite naturally to a form borrowed from civil semi-public precedents. The first great Imperially sponsored Christian basilica is that of St John Lateran, which was given to the Bishop of Rome by Constantine right before or around the Edict of Milan in 313 and was consecrated in the year 324. In the later 4th-century, other Christian basilicas were built in Rome: Santa Sabina, and St Paul's Outside the Walls (4th century), and later St Clement (6th century).
A Christian basilica of the 4th or 5th century stood behind its entirely enclosed forecourt ringed with a colonnade or arcade, like the stoa or peristyle that was its ancestor or like the cloister that was its descendant. This forecourt was entered from outside through a range of buildings along the public street. This was the architectural ground-plan of St Peter's Basilica in Rome, until in the 15th century it was demolished to make way for a modern church built to a new plan.
In most basilicas, the central nave is taller than the aisles, forming a row of windows called a clerestory. Some basilicas in the Caucasus, particularly those of Georgia and Armenia, have a central nave only slightly higher than the two aisles and a single pitched roof covering all three. The result is a much darker interior. This plan is known as the "oriental basilica", or "pseudobasilica" in central Europe.
Gradually, in the early Middle Ages there emerged the massive Romanesque churches, which still kept the fundamental plan of the basilica.
In the United States the style was copied with variances. A rare American church built imitating the architecture of an Early Christian basilica, St. Mary's (German) Church in Pennsylvania, was demolished in 1997.
Basilicas in Eastern Orthodoxy.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the basilica is a mere architectural description of churches built in the ancient style. It bears no significance with regard to precedence or importance of the particular building or clerics associated with it. Eastern basilicas may be single-naved, or have the nave flanked by one or two pairs of lower aisles; it may have a dome in the middle: in this case it is called a "domed basilica".
Ecclesiastical basilicas.
The Early Christian purpose-built basilica was the cathedral basilica of the bishop, on the model of the semi-public secular basilicas, and its growth in size and importance signalled the gradual transfer of civic power into episcopal hands, which was under way in the 5th century. Basilicas in this sense are divided into classes, the major ("greater") basilicas and the minor basilicas; there are three other papal and several pontifical minor basilicas in Italy, and over 1,400 lesser basilicas around the world.
Churches designated as papal basilicas, in particular, possess a papal throne and a papal high altar, at which no one may celebrate Mass without the pope's permission.
Numerous basilicas are notable shrines, often even receiving significant pilgrimages, especially among the many that were built above a "confessio" or the burial place of a martyr – although this term now usually designates a space before the high altar that is sunk lower than the main floor level (as in the case in St Peter's and St John Lateran in Rome) and that offer more immediate access to the burial places below.
Ranking of churches.
The papal or major basilicas outrank in precedence all other churches. Other rankings put the cathedral (or co-cathedral) of a bishop ahead of all other churches in the same diocese, even if they have the title of minor basilica. If the cathedral is that of a suffragan diocese, it yields precedence to the cathedral of the metropolitan see. The cathedral of a primate is considered to rank higher than that of other metropolitan(s) in his circonscription (usually a present or historical state). Other classifications of churches include collegiate churches, which may or may not also be minor basilicas.
Major or papal basilicas.
To this class belong only the four great papal churches of Rome, which among other distinctions have a special "holy door" and to which a visit is always prescribed as one of the conditions for gaining the Roman Jubilee. Upon relinquishing in 2006 the title of Patriarch of the West, Pope Benedict XVI renamed these basilicas from "Patriarchal Basilicas" to "Papal Basilicas".
The four papal or major basilicas were formerly known as "patriarchal basilicas". Together with the minor basilica of St Lawrence outside the Walls, they were associated with the five ancient patriarchal sees of Christendom (see Pentarchy): St John Lateran was associated with Rome, St Peter's with Constantinople (present-day Istanbul), St Paul's with Alexandria (in Egypt), St Mary Major with Antioch (the Levant) and St Lawrence with Jerusalem.
Minor basilicas.
The privileges attached to the status of minor basilica, which is conferred by papal brief, include a certain precedence before other churches, the right of the "conopaeum" (a baldachin resembling an umbrella; also called "umbraculum", "ombrellino", "papilio", "sinicchio", etc.) and the bell ("tintinnabulum"), which are carried side by side in procession at the head of the clergy on state occasions, and the cappa magna which is worn by the canons or secular members of the collegiate chapter when assisting at the Divine Office. In the case of major basilicas these umbraculae are made of cloth of gold and red velvet, while those of minor basilicas are made of yellow and red silk—the colours traditionally associated with both the Papal See and the city of Rome.
There are five "pontifical" minor basilicas in the world (the word "pontifical" meaning "papal", referring to the title pontifex maximus): Pontifical Basilica of Our Lady of the Rosary of Pompeii, the Pontifical Basilica of Saint Nicholas in Bari, the Pontifical Basilica of Saint Anthony in Padua, the Pontifical Basilica of the Holy House at Loreto, the Pontifical Basilica of St Michael in Madrid, Spain.
Until Pope Benedict XVI, the title "patriarchal" (now "papal") was officially given to two minor basilicas associated with Saint Francis of Assisi situated in or near his home town:
The description "patriarchal" still applies to two minor basilicas associated with archbishops who have the title of patriarch: the Patriarchal Cathedral Basilica of St Mark in Venice and the Patriarchal Basilica of Aquileia.
Not all Patriarchal cathedrals are minor basilicas, notably: the Patriarchal Cathedral of St Mary Major in Lisbon, Portugal, the Patriarchal Cathedral of Santa Catarina, Old Goa, India.
Basilicas and pilgrimages.
In recent times, the title of minor basilica has been attributed to important pilgrimage churches. In 1999 Bishop Francesco Giogia stated that the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City (constructed in the 20th century) was the most visited Catholic shrine in the world, followed by San Giovanni Rotondo and Basilica of the National Shrine of Our Lady of Aparecida in Brazil. Millions of pilgrims visit the shrines of Our Lady of Lourdes and Our Lady of Fatima. Pilgrimage basilicas continue to attract well over 30 million pilgrims per year.
Every year, on 13 May and 13 October, the significant dates of the Fatima apparitions, pilgrims fill the country road that leads to the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima with crowds that approach one million on each day. In December 2009 the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe set a new record with 6.1 million pilgrims during Friday and Saturday for the anniversary of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Ecclesiastical basilicas by region.
In 2010, 1587 churches bore the title of basilica.

</doc>
<doc id="54679" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54679" title="Cypherpunk anonymous remailer">
Cypherpunk anonymous remailer

A cypherpunk anonymous remailer is a Type I anonymous remailer that takes messages encrypted with PGP or GPG, or in some cases in plain text, and forwards them removing any identifying information from the header.
Sending a Cypherpunk Message.
Step 1: Retrieving the remailer's Public Key.
Step 2: Import remailer's public keys into PGP or GPG.
Step 3: Compose Message
Step 4: Encrypt Message
Step 5: Send Encrypted Message to Remailer

</doc>
<doc id="54680" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54680" title="Co-NP-complete">
Co-NP-complete

In complexity theory, computational problems that are co-NP-complete are those that are the hardest problems in co-NP, in the sense that any problem in co-NP can be reformulated as a special case of any co-NP complete problem with only polynomial overhead. If P is different from co-NP, then all of the co-NP complete problems are not solvable in polynomial time. If there exists a way to solve a co-NP-complete problem quickly, then that algorithm can be used to solve all co-NP problems quickly.
Each Co-NP-complete problem is the complement of an NP-complete problem. There are some problems in both NP and co-NP, for example all problems in P or integer factorization; however, it is not known if the sets are equal, although inequality is thought more likely. See co-NP and NP-complete for more details.
Fortune showed in 1979 that if any sparse language is co-NP-complete (or even just co-NP-hard), then , a critical foundation for Mahaney's theorem.
Formal definition.
A decision problem "C" is co-NP-complete if it is in co-NP and if every problem in co-NP is polynomial-time many-one reducible to it. This means that for every Co-NP problem "L", there exists a polynomial time algorithm which can transform any instance of "L" into an instance of "C" with the same truth value. As a consequence, if we had a polynomial time algorithm for "C", we could solve all co-NP problems in polynomial time.
Example.
One simple example of a co-NP-complete problem is tautology, the problem of determining whether a given Boolean formula is a tautology; that is, whether every possible assignment of true/false values to variables yields a true statement. This is closely related to the Boolean satisfiability problem, which asks whether there exists "at least one" such assignment. Note that the tautology problem for positive Boolean formulae remains co-NP complete, even though the satisfiability problem is trivial, as every positive Boolean formula is satisfiable.

</doc>
<doc id="54681" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54681" title="NP-hardness">
NP-hardness

NP-hardness ("n"on-deterministic "p"olynomial-time hard), in computational complexity theory, is a class of problems that are, informally, "at least as hard as the hardest problems in NP". More precisely, a problem "H" is NP-hard when every problem "L" in NP can be reduced in polynomial time to "H". As a consequence, finding a polynomial algorithm to solve any NP-hard problem would give polynomial algorithms for all the problems in NP, which is unlikely as many of them are considered hard.
A common mistake is thinking that the "NP" in "NP-hard" stands for "non-polynomial". Although it is widely suspected that there are no polynomial-time algorithms for NP-hard problems, this has never been proven. Moreover, the class NP also contains all problems which can be solved in polynomial time.
Definition.
A decision problem "H" is NP-hard when for every problem "L" in NP, there is a polynomial-time reduction from "L" to "H"
An equivalent definition is to require that every problem "L" in NP can be solved in polynomial time by an oracle machine with an oracle for "H". Informally, we can think of an algorithm that can call such an oracle machine as a subroutine for solving "H", and solves "L" in polynomial time, if the subroutine call takes only one step to compute.
Another definition is to require that there is a polynomial-time reduction from an NP-complete problem "G" to "H". As any problem "L" in NP reduces in polynomial time to "G", "L" reduces in turn to "H" in polynomial time so this new definition implies the previous one. It does not restrict the class NP-hard to decision problems, for instance it also includes search problems, or optimization problems.
Examples.
An example of an NP-hard problem is the decision subset sum problem, which is this: given a set of integers, does any non-empty subset of them add up to zero? That is a decision problem, and happens to be NP-complete. Another example of an NP-hard problem is the optimization problem of finding the least-cost cyclic route through all nodes of a weighted graph. This is commonly known as the traveling salesman problem.
There are decision problems that are NP-hard but not NP-complete, for example the halting problem. This is the problem which asks "given a program and its input, will it run forever?" That is a "yes"/"no" question, so this is a decision problem. It is easy to prove that the halting problem is "NP-hard" but not "NP-complete". For example, the Boolean satisfiability problem can be reduced to the halting problem by transforming it to the description of a Turing machine that tries all truth value assignments and when it finds one that satisfies the formula it halts and otherwise it goes into an infinite loop. It is also easy to see that the halting problem is not in "NP" since all problems in NP are decidable in a finite number of operations, while the halting problem, in general, is undecidable. There are also NP-hard problems that are neither NP-complete nor undecidable. For instance, the language of True quantified Boolean formulas is decidable in polynomial space, but not non-deterministic polynomial time (unless NP = PSPACE).
NP-naming convention.
NP-hard problems do not have to be elements of the complexity class NP.
As NP plays a central role in computational complexity, it is used as the basis of several classes:
Application areas.
NP-hard problems are often tackled with rules-based languages in areas including:

</doc>
<doc id="54682" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54682" title="98 BC">
98 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 98 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Nepos and Didius (or, less frequently, year 656 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 98 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="54683" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54683" title="P-complete">
P-complete

In complexity theory, a decision problem is P-complete (complete for the complexity class P) if it is in P and every problem in P can be reduced to it by an appropriate reduction.
The notion of P-complete decision problems is useful in the analysis of:
The specific type of reduction used varies and may affect the exact set of problems. If we use NC reductions, that is, reductions which can operate in polylogarithmic time on a parallel computer with a polynomial number of processors, then all P-complete problems lie outside NC and so cannot be effectively parallelized, under the unproven assumption that NC ≠ P. If we use the weaker log-space reduction, this remains true, but additionally we learn that all P-complete problems lie outside L under the weaker unproven assumption that L ≠ P. In this latter case the set P-complete may be smaller.
Motivation.
The class P, typically taken to consist of all the "tractable" problems for a sequential computer, contains the class NC, which consists of those problems which can be efficiently solved on a parallel computer. This is because parallel computers can be simulated on a sequential machine. 
It is not known whether NC = P. In other words, it is not known whether there are any tractable problems that are inherently sequential. Just as it is widely suspected that P does not equal NP, so it is widely suspected that NC does not equal P.
Similarly, the class L contains all problems that can be solved by a sequential computer in logarithmic space. Such machines run in polynomial time because they can have a polynomial number of configurations. It is suspected that L ≠ P; that is, that some problems that can be solved in polynomial time also require more than logarithmic space.
Similarly to the use of NP-complete problems to analyze the P = NP question, the P-complete problems, viewed as the "probably not parallelizable" or "probably inherently sequential" problems, serves in a similar manner to study the NC = P question. Finding an efficient way to parallelize the solution to some P-complete problem would show that NC = P. It can also be thought of as the "problems requiring superlogarithmic space"; a log-space solution to a P-complete problem (using the definition based on log-space reductions) would imply L = P.
The logic behind this is analogous to the logic that a polynomial-time solution to an NP-complete problem would prove P = NP: if we have a NC reduction from any problem in P to a problem A, and an NC solution for A, then NC = P. Similarly, if we have a log-space reduction from any problem in P to a problem A, and a log-space solution for A, then L = P.
P-complete problems.
The most basic P-complete problem is this: given a Turing machine, an input for that machine, and a number "T" (written in unary), does that machine halt on that input within the first "T" steps? It is clear that this problem is P-complete: if we can parallelize a general simulation of a sequential computer, then we will be able to parallelize any program that runs on that computer. If this problem is in NC, then so is every other problem in P. If the number of steps is written in binary, the problem is EXPTIME-complete.
This problem illustrates a common trick in the theory of P-completeness. We aren't really interested in whether a problem can be solved quickly on a parallel machine. We're just interested in whether a parallel machine solves it "much more" quickly than a sequential machine. Therefore, we have to reword the problem so that the sequential version is in P. That is why this problem required "T" to be written in unary. If a number "T" is written as a binary number (a string of "n" ones and zeros, where "n" = log "T"), then the obvious sequential algorithm can take time 2"n". On the other hand, if "T" is written as a unary number (a string of "n" ones, where "n" = "T"), then it only takes time "n". By writing "T" in unary rather than binary, we have reduced the obvious sequential algorithm from exponential time to linear time. That puts the sequential problem in P. Then, it will be in NC if and only if it is parallelizable.
Many other problems have been proved to be P-complete, and therefore are widely believed to be inherently sequential. These include the following problems, either as given, or in a decision-problem form:
In order to prove that a given problem in P is P-complete, one typically tries to reduce a known P-complete problem to the given one.
In 1999, Jin-Yi Cai and D. Sivakumar, building on work by Ogihara, showed that if there exists a sparse language that is P-complete, then L = P.
Problems not known to be P-complete.
Some NP-problems are not known to be either NP-complete or in P. These problems (e.g. factoring) are suspected to be difficult. Similarly there are problems in P that are not known to be either P-complete or NC, but are thought to be difficult to parallelize. Examples include the decision problem forms of finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers, and determining what answer the extended Euclidean algorithm would return when given two numbers.

</doc>
<doc id="54684" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54684" title="96 BC">
96 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 96 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ahenobarbus and Longinus (or, less frequently, year 658 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 96 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="54685" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54685" title="PSPACE-complete">
PSPACE-complete

In computational complexity theory, a decision problem is PSPACE-complete if it can be solved using an amount of memory that is polynomial in the input length (polynomial space) and if every other problem that can be solved in polynomial space can be transformed to it in polynomial time. The problems that are PSPACE-complete can be thought of as the hardest problems in PSPACE, because a solution to any one such problem could easily be used to solve any other problem in PSPACE.
The PSPACE-complete problems are widely suspected to be outside the more famous complexity classes P and NP, but that is not known. It is known that they lie outside of the class NC (a class of problems with highly efficient parallel algorithms), because problems in NC can be solved in an amount of space polynomial in the logarithm of the input size, and the class of problems solvable in such a small amount of space is strictly contained in PSPACE by the space hierarchy theorem.
Examples.
Below are descriptions of a few PSPACE-complete problems. More examples can be found at the list of PSPACE-complete problems.
Regular expressions and automata.
Given a regular expression "R", determining whether it generates every string over its alphabet is PSPACE-complete.
A related result is that the class of languages recognizable with zero error by automata with two-way infinite random tape equals nondeterministic linear space. This holds for both two-way and multipass one-way access to input. Testing whether an automaton (with two-way infinite random tape) accepts a word with zero error is NSPACE(O(kn)) complete, where n is the input size and k is the number of states.
Context-sensitive grammars.
The first known PSPACE-complete problem was the word problem for deterministic context-sensitive grammars. In the word problem for context-sensitive grammars, one is given a set of grammatical transformations which can increase, but cannot decrease, the length of a sentence, and wishes to determine if a given sentence could be produced by these transformations. The technical condition of "determinism" (implying roughly that each transformation makes it obvious that it was used) ensures that this process can be solved in polynomial space, and showed that every (possibly non-deterministic) program computable in linear space could be converted into the parsing of a context-sensitive grammar, in a way which preserves determinism. In 1970, Savitch's theorem showed that PSPACE is closed under nondeterminism, implying that even non-deterministic context-sensitive grammars are in PSPACE.
Quantified Boolean formulas.
Nowadays, the archetypal PSPACE-complete problem is generally taken to be the quantified Boolean formula problem (usually abbreviated to QBF or TQBF; the T stands for "true"), a generalization of the first known NP-complete problem, the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT). The satisfiability problem is the problem of whether there are assignments of truth values to variables that make a Boolean expression true. For example, one instance of SAT would be the question of whether the following is true:
The quantified Boolean formula problem differs in allowing both universal and existential quantification over the values of the variables:
The proof that QBF is a PSPACE-complete problem is essentially a restatement of the proof of Savitch's theorem in the language of logic, and is a bit more technical.
Puzzles and games.
The NP-complete problem In the previous section resembles typical puzzles: is there some way to plug in values that solves the problem? Correspondingly, the PSPACE-complete problem there resembles games: is there "some" move I can make, such that for "all" moves my opponent might make, there will then be "some" move I can make to win? The question alternates existential and universal quantifiers. Not surprisingly, many puzzles turn out to be NP-complete, and many games turn out to be PSPACE-complete.
Examples of games that are PSPACE-complete (when generalized so that they can be played on an "n" × "n" board) are the games Hex and Reversi and the solitaire games Rush Hour, Mahjong, Atomix, and Sokoban. Some other generalized games, such as chess, checkers (draughts), and Go are EXPTIME-complete because a game between two perfect players can be very long, so they are unlikely to be in PSPACE. But they will become PSPACE-complete if a polynomial bound on the number of moves is enforced.
Note that the definition of PSPACE-completeness is based on "asymptotic" complexity: the time it takes to solve a problem of size "n", in the limit as "n" grows without bound. That means a game like checkers (which is played on an 8 × 8 board) could never be PSPACE-complete (in fact, they can be solved in constant time and space using a very large lookup table). That is why all the games were modified by playing them on an "n" × "n" board instead; in some cases, such as for Chess, these extensions are somewhat artificial and subjective.
See Game complexity for more games whose completeness for PSPACE or other complexity classes has been determined.

</doc>
<doc id="54688" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54688" title="NP-easy">
NP-easy

In complexity theory, the complexity class NP-easy is the set of function problems that are solvable in polynomial time by a deterministic Turing machine with an oracle for some decision problem in NP.
In other words, a problem X is NP-easy if and only if there exists some problem Y in NP such that X is polynomial-time Turing reducible to Y. This means that given an oracle for Y, there exists an algorithm that solves X in polynomial time (possibly by repeatedly using that oracle).
NP-easy is another name for FPNP (see the function problem article) or for FΔ2P (see the polynomial hierarchy article).
An example of an NP-easy problem is the problem of sorting a list of strings. The decision problem "is string A greater than string B" is in NP. There are algorithms such as Quicksort that can sort the list using only a polynomial number of calls to the comparison routine, plus a polynomial amount of additional work. Therefore, sorting is NP-easy.
There are also more difficult problems that are NP-easy. See NP-equivalent for an example.
The definition of NP-easy uses a Turing reduction rather than a many-one reduction because the answers to problem "Y" are only TRUE or FALSE, but the answers to problem "X" can be more general. Therefore, there is no general way to translate an instance of "X" to an instance of "Y" with the same answer. 

</doc>
<doc id="54690" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54690" title="NP-equivalent">
NP-equivalent

In computational complexity theory, the complexity class NP-equivalent is the set of function problems that are both NP-easy and NP-hard. NP-equivalent is the analogue of NP-complete for function problems.
For example, the problem FIND-SUBSET-SUM is in NP-equivalent. Given a set of integers, FIND-SUBSET-SUM is the problem of finding some nonempty subset of the integers that adds up to zero (or returning the empty set if there is no such subset). This optimization problem is similar to the decision problem SUBSET-SUM. Given a set of integers, SUBSET-SUM is the problem of finding whether there exists a subset summing to zero. SUBSET-SUM is NP-complete.
To show that FIND-SUBSET-SUM is NP-equivalent, we must show that it is both NP-hard and NP-easy.
Clearly it is NP-hard. If we had a black box that solved FIND-SUBSET-SUM in unit time, then it would be easy to solve SUBSET-SUM. Simply ask the black box to find the subset that sums to zero, then check whether it returned a nonempty set.
It is also NP-easy. If we had a black box that solved SUBSET-SUM in unit time, then we could use it to solve FIND-SUBSET-SUM. If it returns "false", we immediately return the empty set. Otherwise, we visit each element in order and remove it provided that SUBSET-SUM would still return "true" after we remove it. Once we've visited every element, we will no longer be able to remove any element without changing the answer from "true" to "false"; at this point the remaining subset of the original elements must sum to zero. This requires us to note that later removals of elements do not alter the fact that removal of an earlier element changed the answer from "true" to "false". In pseudocode:
Another well-known NP-equivalent problem is the traveling salesman problem.

</doc>
<doc id="54691" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54691" title="Direct-access storage device">
Direct-access storage device

A direct-access storage device (DASD) pronounced ) is a secondary storage device in which "each physical record has a discrete location and a unique address." IBM developed DASDs for use with mainframe computers and some minicomputers. Disk drives, magnetic drums, data cells and optical disc drives are all classified as DASDs.
Access methods for DASDs include sequential, indexed, and direct. Direct access contrasts with the sequential access method used in tape drives. A record on a DASD can be accessed without having to read through intervening records from the current location, whereas reading anything other than the "next" record on tape requires skipping over intervening records, and requires a proportionally long time to access a distant point in a medium. 
The DASD storage class includes both fixed and removable media.
Architecture.
IBM mainframes access I/O devices including DASDs through "channels", a type of subordinate mini-processor. "Channel programs" write to, read from, and control the given device.
CTR (CHR).
Channel programs address DASD using an eight-byte absolute module-bin-cylinder-track-record block address, or MBBCCHHR:
When the data cell was discontinued in January 1975, the addressing scheme and the device itself was referred to as CHR or CTR for cylinder-track-record, as the bin number was always 0.
IBM refers to the data records programmers work with as "logical records", and the format on disc as blocks or "physical records". One block might contain several logical (or user) records or, in some schemes, partial logical records.
Physical records can have any size up to the limit of a cylinder, although in usual practice, blocks or physical records do not exceed the capacity of a single track.
The access methods are responsible for "blocking" and "deblocking" logical records as they are written to or read from external media.
CKD.
CHR/CTR acronyms should not be confused with CKD, which refers to Count Key Data, the layout of an addressable data record on a CTR.
FBA.
In the 1970s, IBM introduced fixed block architecture (FBA) for mainframes. At the programming level, these devices do not use the traditional CHR addressing, but reference fixed-length blocks by number, much like sectors in mini-computers. More correctly, the application programmer remains unaware of the underlying storage arrangement, which stores the data in fixed physical block lengths of 512, 1024, 2048, or 4096.
For some applications, FBA not only offers simplicity, but an increase in throughput. 
FBA is supported by VM/370 and DOS/VSE, but not MVS or successor operating systems in the OS/360 line.
Access.
The programming interface macros and routines are collectively called DAM: direct access methods.
Present terminology.
Both drums and data cells have disappeared as products, so DASD remains as a synonym of disk and optical devices. Modern DASD used in mainframes only very rarely consist of single disk-drives. Most commonly "DASD" means large disk arrays utilizing RAID schemes.

</doc>
<doc id="54692" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54692" title="Hyde Park">
Hyde Park

Hyde Park may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="54694" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54694" title="EXPTIME">
EXPTIME

In computational complexity theory, the complexity class EXPTIME (sometimes called EXP or DEXPTIME) is the set of all decision problems that have exponential runtime, i.e., that are solvable by a deterministic Turing machine in O(2"p"("n")) time, where "p"("n") is a polynomial function of "n".
In terms of DTIME,
We know
and also, by the time hierarchy theorem and the space hierarchy theorem, that
so at least one of the first three inclusions and at least one of the last three inclusions must be proper, but it is not known which ones are. Most experts believe all the inclusions are proper. It's also known that if , then , the class of problems solvable in exponential time by a nondeterministic Turing machine. More precisely, if and only if there exist sparse languages in NP that are not in P.
EXPTIME can also be reformulated as the space class APSPACE, the problems that can be solved by an alternating Turing machine in polynomial space. This is one way to see that PSPACE ⊆ EXPTIME, since an alternating Turing machine is at least as powerful as a deterministic Turing machine.
EXPTIME is one class in an exponential hierarchy of complexity classes with increasingly more complex oracles or quantifier alternations. The class 2-EXPTIME is defined similarly to EXPTIME but with a doubly exponential time bound formula_2. This can be generalized to higher and higher time bounds.
EXPTIME-complete.
A decision problem is EXPTIME-complete if it is in EXPTIME, and every problem in EXPTIME has a polynomial-time many-one reduction to it. In other words, there is a polynomial-time algorithm that transforms instances of one to instances of the other with the same answer. Problems that are EXPTIME-complete might be thought of as the hardest problems in EXPTIME. Notice that although we don't know if NP is equal to P or not, we do know that EXPTIME-complete problems are not in P; it has been proven that these problems cannot be solved in polynomial time, by the time hierarchy theorem.
In computability theory, one of the basic undecidable problems is the halting problem: deciding whether a deterministic Turing machine (DTM) halts. One of the most fundamental EXPTIME-complete problems is a simpler version of this, which asks if a DTM halts in at most "k" steps. It is in EXPTIME because a trivial simulation requires O("k") time, and the input "k" is encoded using O(log "k") bits. It is EXPTIME-complete because, roughly speaking, we can use it to determine if a machine solving an EXPTIME problem accepts in an exponential number of steps; it will not use more. The same problem with the number of steps written in unary is P-complete.
Other examples of EXPTIME-complete problems include the problem of evaluating a position in generalized chess, checkers, or Go (with Japanese ko rules). These games have a chance of being EXPTIME-complete because games can last for a number of moves that is exponential in the size of the board. In the Go example, the Japanese ko rule is sufficiently intractable to imply EXPTIME-completeness, but it is not known if the more tractable American or Chinese rules for the game are EXPTIME-complete.
By contrast, generalized games that can last for a number of moves that is polynomial in the size of the board are often PSPACE-complete. The same is true of exponentially long games in which non-repetition is automatic.
Another set of important EXPTIME-complete problems relates to succinct circuits. Succinct circuits are simple machines used to describe some graphs in exponentially less space. They accept two vertex numbers as input and output whether there is an edge between them. For many natural P-complete graph problems, where the graph is expressed in a natural representation such as an adjacency matrix, solving the same problem on a succinct circuit representation is EXPTIME-complete, because the input is exponentially smaller; but this requires nontrivial proof, since succinct circuits can only describe a subclass of graphs.

</doc>
