<doc id="77784" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77784" title="Dish Network">
Dish Network

Dish Network (re-branded as "dish") is an American direct-broadcast satellite service provider. The company provides satellite television, satellite internet, audio programming, and interactive television services to commercial and residential customers in the United States. , the company provided services to 13.9 million television and 628,000 broadband subscribers. The company has approximately 18,000 employees. The company is headquartered in Meridian, Colorado, though the postal designation of nearby Englewood is used in the corporate mailing address.
In January 2008, Dish Network was spun off from EchoStar, its former parent company, which was founded by Charlie Ergen as a satellite television equipment distributor in 1980. The company began using Dish Network as its consumer brand in March 1996, after the successful launch of its first satellite, EchoStar I, in December 1995. That launch marked the beginning of its subscription television services, and EchoStar has since launched numerous satellites, with nine owned and leased satellites in its fleet as of January 2013. EchoStar continues to be the primary technology partner to Dish Network.
Joseph Clayton became president and chief executive officer of the company in June 2011, while Charlie Ergen remained chairman. Clayton remained in the position until March 31, 2015 when he retired leaving Ergen to resume the post. Ergen has said diversifying and updating technology for the company will be a high priority, with an expectation that, over the coming decade, the company will provide internet, video, and telephone service for both home and mobile applications.
Services.
Dish's main service is satellite television. Its offerings are similar to other satellite and cable companies. Viewers can choose from a series of service bundles, paying more money for more channels. A la carte programming is available, however limited other than Premium channels. The company is currently working on diversifying its offerings. With its purchase of Blockbuster LLC, it now owns the Blockbuster trademarks and has used its intellectual property agreement to offer streaming and mail-order video services.
Dish Anywhere is Dish's subscriber-only streaming video service, which includes HBO and Cinemax programming.
In May 2012, the American Customer Satisfaction Index ranked Dish second among American television providers.
Tailgater.
Tailgater is a portable satellite antenna; the tailgater is able to be purchased as a standalone device for $350, The Tailgater is now being supported by a Wally receiver, to replace the still supported 211k model. Customers only need pay for the period of time where the receiver is active on the dish account, monthly cost for a Vip211k or Wally is $7 per month, if the receiver is the only one on the account, there is no charge. It weighs ten pounds, is protected from weather, and automatically searches for a signal. The only satellites that are currently compatible with the Tailgater are at Dish's 119 (SD/HD TV), 110 (SD/HD TV), and 129 (SD/HD TV) orbital slots.
Hopper.
In March 2012, Dish began offering a digital video recorder called Dish Hopper (DVR) that can automatically record all prime time programming on the four major television networks. The DVR, which costs $12 per month, has three tuners and 2 TB of space, half of which can be used to record 500 hours of high-definition television or 2000 hours of standard-definition television programs. The other half is for video on demand. A Hopper feature, called AutoHop, enables customers to view these programs without commercials, subject to time restrictions. AutoHop has attracted enthusiasts, critics, boycotts and legal action. At the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show Dish won an award for their AutoHop feature on the Hopper.
Hopper with Sling.
At the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show, Dish announced the "Hopper with Sling", an updated version of the Hopper with Slingbox place-shifting technology built-in, allowing the ability to watch live TV and DVR recordings online or through a free Dish Anywhere mobile app, and the ability to "fling" content from a mobile device (such as videos or photos) onto the TV as well. A Hopper Transfers app for the iPad and Android also allows recordings to be downloaded directly to the device for offline viewing and a new Dish Explorer app also provides control of the Hopper along with integration with social networks to track trends and reactions to a program only. The new Hopper also includes a 2 TB hard drive (allowing the storage of up to 2,000 hours of standard definition recordings and 500 hours in high definition) and a Broadcom BCM7425 CPU.
CNET praised the Hopper with Sling for being cutting-edge technology that "helps Dish make a strong case that its HD DVR is the most advanced out there." It subsequently nominated the new Hopper for the CES Best in Show award (which was decided by CNET), and had won the award based off the original vote of CNET's staff. However, CNET's parent company CBS Corporation vetoed the results, disqualified the device, and forced a re-vote because CBS was in active litigation with Dish. After complaints by critics (including Consumer Electronics Association CEO Gary Shapiro), CNET was dropped as the organizer of the CES awards program, and the Best in Show award was re-awarded to both the Hopper with Sling and the Razer Edge gaming tablet (which had won in the second vote by CNET).
Sling TV.
In May 2012, Dish launched DishWorld—a subscription-based over-the-top IPTV service, as an app on Roku devices, offering access to over 50 international television channels via broadband streaming.
In 2014, Dish Network began to reach carriage deals with broadcasters for a new over-the-top service that would be aimed towards cord cutters as a low-cost alternative to traditional pay television. On January 5, 2015, Dish Network officially unveiled Sling TV, an over-the-top IPTV service designed to compliment subscription video on-demand services such as Hulu and Netflix.
Some broadcasters have been hesitant about over-the-top services such as Sling TV, showing concern that they may undermine their carriage deals with larger conventional cable, satellite and Internet TV providers. Time Warner initially noted that the carriage of its channels on the service was only for a "trial" basis, while both Time Warner's CEO Jeffrey Bewkes and an analyst from the firm Macquarie Capital disclosed that current contract language in Dish's OTT carriage deals with the service's content distributors would cap the number of subscribers that the service is allowed to have at any given time to 5 million. Neither Dish Network or its content providers have confirmed any such cap. , the service has approximately 600,000 subscribers.
DishNet.
On September 27, 2012, Dish Network announced a satellite broadband service called DishNET, aimed at rural areas, to be launched on October 1.
Founding and early growth.
Dish Network officially began operations on March 4, 1996, as a service of EchoStar. EchoStar, a precursor to Dish Network, was formed in 1980 by its chairman and chief executive officer, Charlie Ergen along with colleagues Candy Ergen and Jim Defranco, as a distributor of C band satellite television systems. In 1987, EchoStar applied for a direct broadcast satellite broadcast license with the Federal Communications Commission and was granted access to orbital slot 119° west longitude in 1992.
In 1998, EchoStar purchased the broadcasting assets of a satellite broadcasting joint venture of News Corporation and MCI Worldcom, called ASkyB (for "American Sky Broadcasting", named after News Corp's BSkyB service in Britain); the two companies had nearly merged (which called for Dish Network being renamed Sky) before it was called off due to Charlie Ergen's clashes with News Corp. executives. With this purchase EchoStar obtained 28 of the 32 transponder licenses in the 110° West orbital slot, more than doubling existing continental United States broadcasting capacity at a value of $682.5 million; some of the other assets were picked up by rival PrimeStar, which was sold to DirecTV in 1999. The acquisition (which also included an uplink center in Gilbert, AZ) inspired the company to introduce a multi satellite system called Dish 500, theoretically capable of receiving more than 500 channels on one Dish. In the same year, Echostar, partnering with Bell Canada, launched Dish Network Canada.
HD expansion.
In January 1999, the company released the industry's first high-definition television (HDTV) tuner. In August 2003, the company launched EchoStar IX, the first satellite equipped with commercial Ka band payload for broadband service over the United States. This led the company in 2004 to be the first satellite TV service to offer local channels to all 50 states. In that year, the company also introduced the nation's first interactive TV multiple picture-in picture application for the Olympic Games, offering coverage from multiple channels at once. This year the company also acquired its 10 millionth customer.
In January 2005, EchoStar bought the broadcasting assets of the troubled HDTV satellite provider Voom, including its Rainbow 1 satellite co-located with EchoStar 3 at 61.5° West. On April 29, EchoStar announced that it would expand its HDTV programming by adding the first 10 of 21 original Voom channels and mirror the channels on a CONUS slot. Dish Network added CNN HD in Spanish along with other packages in its Latino HD lineup.
On January 1, 2008, the company completed its spinoff of its technology and set-top box business into a separate publicly traded company, Echostar Corporation ("Echostar"), effectively splitting the original Echostar into two separate businesses. Dish Network Corporation, the larger of the two resulting companies, focuses on programming, service and marketing of satellite television, while EchoStar Corporation runs a majority of the satellite fleet and other signal infrastructure. While neither company has any ownership in the other, the majority of the voting power of the shares in both companies is owned by Charlie Ergen.
Acquisitions and expansion.
In 2011, Dish Network spent over $3 billion in acquisitions of companies in bankruptcy, which Motley Fool's Anders Bylund described as "a veritable buying rampage in the bargain bin." This includes the April 6, 2011, purchase of Blockbuster Inc. in a bankruptcy auction in New York, agreeing to pay $322 million in cash and assume $87 million in liabilities and other obligations for the nationwide video-rental company. Dish Network also acquired the defunct companies DBSD and Terrestar. Dish Network also made a bid to purchase Hulu on October 2011, but Hulu's owners chose not to sell the company. There was also speculation that Dish Network might purchase Sprint Nextel or Clearwire. In 2013, Dish made a bid for both companies. CEO Charles Ergen plans on adding wireless internet and mobile video services that can compete with Netflix and cable companies. About the new markets, Ergen said, "Given the assets we've been accumulating, I don't think it's hard to see we're moving in a different direction from simply pay-TV, which is a market that's becoming increasingly saturated."
Dish Network put its Blockbuster acquisition to work by making available Dish Movie Pack for Dish Network subscribers and Sling TV for non-Dish Network subscribers. Blockbuster also has agreements that allow it to receive movies 28 days before Netflix and Redbox which could encourage customers to use these services.
Dish Network also plans on offering high-speed internet. The company plans a hybrid satellite/terrestrial mobile broadband service. In 2011, it petitioned the FCC to combine the S-Band spectrum it acquired from DBSD and Terrestar, and combine this spectrum with LTE. Unlike LightSquared, Dish's spectrum has minimal risk of disrupting Global Positioning Systems.
At the 2012 Consumer Electronics Show, Dish Network announced that they would be dropping the “Network” and going solely by Dish (along with a new logo) in their marketing. Dish Network's parent company will remain "Dish Network".
After changing the position of a satellite orbital position from being over Mexico to Brazil in 2011, Dish Network sought companies that could make a deal, among them Telefónica. However, nothing ever came of this, and Dish decided to enter the country itself. According to the Brazilian Agency of Telecommunications (Anatel), they await the authorization of the application.
Technical information.
Satellite dishes.
Dish Network offers different types of satellite receiving equipment for obtaining from its diverse satellite fleet. Most of their consumer boxes are manufactured by Sanmina-SCI Corporation to EchoStar specifications. Prior to the December 2001 merger of SCI Systems and Sanmina, Dish Network receivers were produced at factories in Huntsville, Alabama and Fountain, Colorado. Currently, receiver assembly takes place in Guadalajara, Mexico and India.
Earlier satellite dishes.
Dish Network's first satellite antenna was simply called the "Dish Network" Dish. It was retroactively named the "Dish 300" when legal and satellite problems forced delays of the forthcoming Dish 500 systems. It uses one LNB to obtain signals from the 119°W orbital location, and was commonly used as a second Dish to receive additional high-definition or ethnic programming from either the 148°W or 61.5°W orbital locations. The 119°W slot is one of two primary orbital locations, the other being 110°W, that provide core services.
After EchoStar obtained the broadcasting assets of a failed joint venture between ASkyB and MCI WorldCom, it had more than doubled its capacity by adding 28 transponders at the 110°W orbital location. Since EchoStar also owned the adjacent 119°W orbital location it developed the Dish 500 to receive the signals of both orbital locations using one Dish and an innovative dual-LNB assembly. Although the new 20-inch Dish 500 was slightly larger than the then-current 18-inch Dish 300 and DirecTV Dishes it had the distinct advantage of obtaining signals from EchoStar's two adjacent satellite locations for a theoretical 500-channel capacity. The Dish 500, as a result, provided very large capacity for local-into-local service, nationwide programming, and business services. In order to migrate existing customers to Dish 500, Dish Network provides value-added channels in addition to local channels that can only be received with the Dish 500 and newer systems. Some of the channels exclusive to these newer systems are H2, Boomerang, Science, Planet Green, PBS Kids Sprout and Comedy Central.
Higher capacity satellite dishes.
In spite of all this capacity, EchoStar still needed to fulfill the dream of nationwide high-definition television and conceived the Dish 1000 system to receive signals from 110°W, 119°W, and 129°W orbital locations. Originally, Dish Network high-definition subscribers required two separate satellite dishes. Currently, Dish Network subscribers can receive nationwide HDTV channels using the 129°W orbital location or 61.5°W orbital location. Because of issues with low signal strength, the older model Dish 1000 has been replaced with the Dish 1000.2. The 1000.2 has a 10% larger reflector for better signal strength and an integrated LNB for easier installation. The Dish 1000.2 is in diameter. Even with the larger size, there are still many reports of customers consistently losing signal on the 129°W orbital location. This has forced some customers to either use a 2nd separate Dish Network brand dish, or an aftermarket 30" dish, aimed specifically at the 129°W orbital location. On several satellite related web support forums, customers have critically suggested that the new Dish 1000.2 wasn't nearly large enough and should have been 20–30% larger to properly deal with rain fade. Later Dish Network took the approach of splitting the US into two regions. Subscribers west of Chicago use Dish 1000.2 antennas aimed at the 110°W, 119°W, and 129°W orbital locations (referred to as the western arc). Subscribers east of Chicago use Dish 1000.4 antennas aimed at the 61.5°W, 72°W and 77°W oribital locations (referred to as the eastern arc).
During Dish Network's quest for capacity, they had accumulated an array of satellite broadcasting technologies, orbital locations, and surplus capacity using non-mainstream technologies requiring larger dish sizes. To capitalize on these broadcasting assets, Dish Network started providing extensive ethnic programming from lower-powered satellites broadcasting in the non-DBS portion of the FSS band. Dish Network offers specialized equipment for these customers including larger dish antennas.
The SuperDish, Dish 500+, and Dish 1000+ systems receive DBS signals from both of the primary 110°W and 119°W locations (129°W for Dish 1000+) as well as lower-powered FSS signals from either 121°W, 105°W, or 118.75°W. The Dish 500+ and 1000+ systems receive circularly polarized signals in the non-DBS portion of the FSS band—the only American satellite television service to do so.
Broadcast technology.
While for years Dish Network has used standard MPEG-2 for broadcasting, the addition of bandwidth-intensive HDTV in a limited-bandwidth world has called for a change to an H.264/MPEG-4 AVC system. Dish Network announced as of February 1, 2006, that all new HDTV channels would be available in H.264 format only, while maintaining the current lineup as MPEG-2. Dish Network intends to eventually convert the entire platform to H.264 in order to provide more channels to subscribers. In 2007, Dish Network reduced the resolution of 1080-line channels from 1920x1080 to 1440x1080. Reducing horizontal resolution and/or data rate of HD video is known as HD Lite and is practiced by other TV providers as well.
Both a standard receiver and a receiver with built-in digital video recorder (DVR) are available to subscribers. The Dish Network ViP722 HD DVR (Record up to 350 hours of standard-definition (SD), up to 55 hours of high-definition (HD)) replacement to the ViP622 has received generally positive reviews from CNET and others.
Both a standard receiver and a DVR (digital video recorder) are available to subscribers for an upgrade fee. Beginning in January 2010, Dish Network charges $7.00 as a DVR service fee, which covers cost of licensing EPG (electronic program guide) listings from Rovi Corporation, with the "TV Guide" logo displayed on listings screens to signify the partnership.
Satellite fleet.
Most of the satellites used by Dish Network are owned and operated by EchoStar. Since EchoStar frequently moves satellites among its many orbiting slots this list may not be immediately accurate. Refer to Lyngsat and Dish Channel Chart for detailed satellite information.
Criticisms and controversies.
Since the early 2000s, Dish Network received criticism regarding controversial technology and carriage disputes with programming providers. Most notably, when the Hopper digital video recorder provided an easy way for viewers to watch certain programming without commercials, major networks sued Dish Network.
AutoHop.
Dish Network's Hopper digital video recorder, announced in January 2012, led to controversy over a feature, called "AutoHop", which allows viewers to watch some programming without commercials, subject to time restrictions.
AutoHop is an extension of the DVR's prime time recording capability. When enabled, the feature records but hides commercials, giving viewers the option of viewing prime time programming on the four major networks commercial-free. Commercials cannot be skipped until 1 am Eastern Time, and the viewer must choose to do this. Recorded programs are available for eight days after they have aired. News of AutoHop met with an immediate, polarized response. The feature was deemed a "dream come true" for consumers, but for networks, a nightmare undercutting the revenue model. Dish asserted that AutoHop would encourage its customers to sample new programming. Leslie Moonves, CBS chief executive, asked rhetorically how he is to produce "CSI" without the revenue stream of commercials. News Corporation refused to accept Dish advertising for the device. A Forrester Research analyst said the move demonstrated Dish's desperation to keep customers at a time when alternative programming is readily available via the Internet.
The controversy surrounding AutoHop contributed to one small-market station group, Hoak Media Corporation, removing its 14 stations channels from the service on June 6, 2012. In negotiations, Hoak sought a 200 percent increase in carriage fees and the dropping of the AutoHop feature. David Shull, Dish senior vice president of programming, accused Hoak of effectively telling Dish's customers that they must watch commercials, disrespecting customer control over its services. Eight days later, the two companies announced a distribution deal. Terms were not disclosed.
On June 27, 2012, Dish Chairman Charlie Ergen told the United States House Subcommittee on Communications and Technology that the feature would enable parents to protect their children from alcohol and fast food advertising. The next day, Michael Petricone of the Consumer Electronics Association spoke to the subcommittee, likening Hopper to earlier time shifting devices. He argued that Hopper is legal and that AutoHop entices people to watch more television, thereby expanding television's market.
CNET was also forced by parent company CBS to disqualify the newest "Hopper with Sling" model from the CES Best in Show award for 2013 because of its active litigation with the company. CEO Joe Clayton said that Dish was "saddened that CNET's staff is being denied its editorial independence because of CBS' heavy handed tactics." Dish Network directly attacked CBS for its decision in an advertisement for the device on its website. The ad proclaimed the DVR as being CNET's "Best in Show", but with a footnote stating that "CBS will go to any lengths to keep you from enjoying ad-skipping technologyeven censoring its own writers and throwing out their decision to name Hopper 'Best In Show.' Your vote is the only one that really matters."
Work environment.
One news report described Dish as having "an Ergen-created culture of condescension and distrust."
In 2012, the investment analysis and commentary site 24/7 Wall St. named Dish Network #1 among "America's Worst Companies To Work For," an assessment based upon employee reviews at the employment website Glassdoor.com. Such reviews should be interpreted with caution, however, as reviews at such sites sample few employees compared to the company as a whole, and are weighted towards ex-employees with keenly-felt grievances; current and ambivalent ex-employees are less likely to post reviews. It should be noted that every company is subject to the same caveats and Dish was still found to be the worst. Long hours, little vacation, and too much mandatory overtime were all common complaints.
Dish's toxic corporate culture was cited as a key difficulty in its aborted acquisition of Sprint Nextel. David Hekman, a business professor at the University of Colorado said, "This will be a huge issue for the Sprint employees. If they're subjected to this meaner culture, it could be a real wake-up call." Hekman also stated, "If he gets revolt from the Sprint employees, ... then there will be no synergy, and then the merger would be viewed as a failure." Dish was aware of the problem. After announcing its attempted merger with Sprint it took out a full-page ad in the Kansas City Star declaring its commitment to "building a company that can deliver sustained growth over many years." The ad also said, "We look forward to the opportunity to work together with Sprint's board and its management team to develop a combined vision, remaining mindful of how it will benefit customers, employees, shareholders and, of course, the Kansas City community. As things move forward, we will stay in touch."
Dish has very rapid employee turnover. The company does not report exactly how many people it fires each quarter. Dish refers to its quarterly culling of employees as "talent upgrades." Michael Neuman, a former president of Dish, quit after only eight months. He said that Ergen acts unilaterally and "pound people in submission." No president of Dish has remained in the job for more than four years and many left after only one year.
For years, Dish employees were required to clock in at the beginning of their day using fingerprint scanners. This measure angered many employees. The fingerprint scanners were eventually removed. Badges were previously used to monitor the arrival and departure of employees. The company started using fingerprints after Charles Ergen noticed some employees helping each other swipe their badges for them. If an employee is late an email is sent to human resources. Human resources will in turn contact the employee's manager, possibly even Charlie Ergen himself. Multiple former employees said it was common for Ergen to scream publicly at executives for arriving even minutes late. Dish does not allow its employees to work from home.
For several years, Dish policy required that any tip over 15 percent given on an expensed meal would be subtracted from the paycheck of the responsible employee. Dish does not provide employees with company credit cards.
Telemarketing violations.
Dish Network independent dealers have repeatedly been charged and fined for employing illegal telemarketing tactics, such as violating do not call lists and making calls in which a live telemarketer does not connect promptly after the call is answered. Dish Network terminated agreements with some independent dealers in relation to these charges. In March 2009 the Federal Trade Commission charged Dish Network and two of its dealers with multiple violations of the FTC's Telemarketing Sales Rule and the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991.
AMC Networks.
On March 4, 2012, Dish Network announced that it would no longer carry the AMC Networks family of cable channels upon the expiration of the satellite provider's distribution agreement with the company at the end of June 2012, citing that AMC Networks charged an excessive amount in retransmission consent payments from the service for their carriage and low audience viewership for the channels.
AMC Networks responded to Dish's announcement of its pending removal of the channels as being related to a 2008 breach of contract lawsuit against Dish Network by former company parent Rainbow Media's Voom HD Networks, in which it is seeking more than $2.5 billion in damages against Dish for improperly terminating its carriage contract; Voom's high-definition channels were carried on the provider from May 1, 2005 until May 12, 2008 when Dish removed ten of Voom's fifteen channels from its lineup (the five remaining Voom HD channels were removed from Dish the day after). However, Dish states that the lawsuit is unrelated to the decision to remove the AMC Networks channels and that it ended the carriage agreement on its own terms.
On May 20, 2012, Dish Network removed Sundance Channel from its channel lineup. Two weeks later on June 4, 2012, Dish relocated AMC, WE tv, and IFC to higher channel positions with AMC being split into two separate standard definition and high definition channel feeds (AMC moved from channel 130 to channel 9609 for the SD feed and 9610 for the HD feed, WE tv moved from channel 128 to channel 9608 and IFC was moved from channel 393 to channel 9607); the former channel lineup spaces occupied by the three channels were respectively replaced with HDNet, Style and MoviePlex multiplex channel Indieplex. The move is believed to be in response to an ad run during a June 3 airing of an episode of "Mad Men" urging Dish Network customers to inform the company to keep the three AMC Networks channels on the satellite provider with Dish stating that the relocated channel positions better reflect the channels' ratings.
On June 30, 2012, Dish dropped the three AMC Networks properties, replacing AMC with HDNet movies, IFC with HDNet (which subsequently became AXS TV two days later), and WE tv with Style. The move coincided with a new agreement between Dish and AT&T U-verse.
On July 12, 2012, AMC said in an e-mailed statement that it would stream over the Internet the season premiere of "Breaking Bad" to DISH customers. "Dish subscribers can register online starting July 13 for the show, which airs on July 15. We want to give Dish customers an extra week to switch providers so they can enjoy the rest of the season."
On October 21, 2012, AMC Networks announced a settlement was reached between them, Cablevision and Dish in which Dish was forced to pay up to $700 Million in damages to Cablevision for damages from removing Voom owned channels off the Dish Lineup back in 2008, and in return Dish signed a new agreement to bring the AMC networks owned channels back on the Dish lineup with AMC returning October 21 and the rest on November 1st.
Also, DISH simultaneously brought back FUSE, and all 4 channels were moved from "America's Top 200" to 120.
Remarks on rural viewers.
During a conference call Ergen stated after being asked about the removal of AMC channels, "Our customers are not looking at zombies in New York City. They live in farms and ranches ... We have data, real data from our customers. And for whatever reason, our customers don't watch some of those critically acclaimed channels at the level that we read about in the paper, perhaps because we skew a bit rural or whatever." Bergen also said "I've had satellite television for as long as satellite television has been around, and there's never been one minute that I know of that anybody in my family or anybody who's came to my house has ever watched one second of any of those channels. They have no clue about zombies in New York City marching around saying, 'Where is my AMC?'" Soon after the call, "Business Insider" blared the headline, "Dish CEO says customers don't care about AMC because they live on 'farms and ranches.'"
Turner Networks.
On October 21, 2014, during the early morning hours, Dish entered a dispute with Time Warner's Turner Broadcasting System. Dish removed CNN, HLN, Cartoon Network/Adult Swim, Boomerang, TruTV, Turner Classic Movies, and CNN en Español as the contract to carry those channels expired on October 20. TBS and TNT were not removed, as they are carried under a different contract. The channels were pulled without warning leaving many with questions. 
Dish Dish replaced CNN and HLN with MSNBC, replaced Cartoon Network and Boomerang with Nicktoons (except for the West Feed which was replaced by a message about the removal of the channels), replaced Turner Classic Movies with FXM, and replaced TruTV with Esquire Network during the duration of the dispute. The dispute was settled and the Turner Network Channels restored on November 21, 2014.
Hidden fees.
In January 2004, thirteen states charged that Echostar, then the parent company of Dish Network, had not disclosed termination fees to potential customers and had debited customers' bank accounts for hidden fees. The company settled the lawsuit, paid $5 million, and promised to disclose all terms prior to signing contracts with potential customers.
Dish has also begun to collect shipping fees on equipment that needs to be returned after customers cancel their service with Dish. The shipping cost as of Sept. 2014 is $17. This fee applies regardless of whether the fee was included in the initial contract customers signed.
Government subsidies.
Dish Network received about $3 billion in subsidies from the federal government to buy wireless bandwidth. Dish Network used the 1934 Federal Communications Act to win subsidies for the purchases it made at the January 2015 auction of wireless spectrum. Under the terms of that act, "designated entities" qualify for a 25 percent discount on the market price of such licenses. Dish used small subsidiaries such as Northstar Wireless and SNR Wireless in order to qualify. Dish only paid $10 billion for licenses that would have otherwise cost $13 billion. The difference would have been paid to the federal government. The FEC and the United States Senate opened investigations into the matter after numerous public complaints.
Litigation.
Dish has been sued and countersued dozens and dozens of times. In fact, Dish uses litigation as a profit center. Charlie Ergen said, "I may be the only CEO who likes to go to depositions. You can live in a bubble, and you’re probably not going to get a disease. But you can play in the mud and the dirt, and you’re probably not going to get a disease either, because you get immune to it. You pick your poison, and I think we choose to go play in the mud.” In 2001, Dish admitted to using over 100 law firms over a ten-year period.
AutoHop.
On May 24, 2012, Dish and the networks filed suit in federal court, the Dish case in Manhattan and the networks' cases in Los Angeles. On May 30, U.S. District Judge Laura Taylor Swain ruled the networks' cases should not be filed in Los Angeles and asked for comments on a possible move of all cases to New York.
In July 9 preliminary judgement, Swain denied Dish's request to set aside the issue of copyright violation, ruling that Dish's argument lacked specificity. She also ruled that the case could be heard in Los Angeles, thereby eliminating New York as a potential venue.
On November 7, 2012, the United States District Court for the Central District of California denied Fox's motion for preliminary injunction for the reasons mainly because 1) PTAT and AutoHop did not infringe copyright and did not breach the contract; and 2) while QA copies constituted a copyright infringement and breached the contract, the harm from the copies was not irreparable, but was compensable with money.
Fox appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. On July 24, 2013, the Ninth Circuit reviewed the district court's decision with a very deferential standard of review, and affirmed it.
Off-the-job marijuana use.
Dish fired a wheelchair-bound quadriplegic man from his job as a telephone operator in 2010, Brandon Coats, for using medical-marijuana during off-work hours. Coats used marijuana to control muscle spasms. His paralysis was due to injuries from a car crash. Coats failed a random drug test. Coats sued claiming that marijuana use was legal and that he was a model employee. Coats suit relied under a Colorado law called the Lawful Off-Duty Activities Statute that prohibits employers from firing employees for doing legal things during their personal time. The trial court and Colorado Court of Appeals ruled in Coats v. Dish Network that since marijuana is banned by federal law it does not qualify as legal activity despite being permitted by state law. The trial court ruled that Coats should have to pay Dish's legal fees; the appeals court overturned this ruling.
Voom.
In April 2005, Rainbow Media and Dish Network entered into a 15-year affiliation agreement whereby EchoStar’s Dish Network obtained the right to distribute the Voom channels until 2020 and agreed that it would pay Rainbow Media monthly subscription fees for the life of the agreement. The subscription fees started at $3.25 per subscriber in the first year of the agreement, and were to increase to $6.43 per subscriber by the year 2020. In a separate agreement, EchoStar’s Dish obtained a 20% ownership interest in Rainbow Media (the business unit that contained the Voom HD channels) and Rainbow agreed to invest $100 million into the Voom service each year for the first five years of the agreement. As a result, EchoStar's Dish Network announced that they would be adding ten of Voom's original 21 channels to their lineup starting May 1; the remaining channels were added on February 1, 2006.
In January 2008, EchoStar's Dish Network abandoned the affiliation agreement claiming that Voom had failed to invest $100 million in the service during 2006 although Cablevision and Rainbow provided Dish Network with the financial statements documenting their compliance. Dish Network proceeded to remove ten of the channels from their lineup on May 12, 2008, with the remaining five removed the next day, leaving coverage limited to Cablevision's systems in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and parts of Pennsylvania. Cablevision and Rainbow sued Dish Network for breach of contract and sought more than $2.5 billion in damages. Citing this drop in carriage and the ensuing lengthy litigation, Cablevision announced on December 18 that the Voom HD suite would be discontinued as of January 15, 2009, to be replaced by other HD programming. (Ultimately, the channels ceased operations on January 20, and were replaced by multiplexed HD content from premium providers.)
Following the discovery process, the court granted Voom's motion for sanctions. The New York State Supreme Court found that EchoStar's Dish Network "systematically destroyed evidence" in the case and stated that “it is entirely possible that the documents destroyed by EchoStar demonstrated that EchoStar knew all along that there was no breach...and would prove Voom’s case.” The Judge also stated that he would tell jurors that Dish Network destroyed evidence and that the jury may assume the evidence would have been helpful to Voom’s case.
According to Sanford C. Bernstein analyst Craig Moffett in a recent Wall Street Journal article, "cases involving spoilation of evidence rarely go to trial because the odds are so skewed against the offending party." In this case, the judge told the jury that EchoStar failed to preserve certain evidence; he barred Dish from calling its expert witness to testify on damages. Additionally, the court stated in its November 3, 2010 ruling: “In conclusion, the court notes EchoStar’s pattern of egregious conduct and questionable – and, at times, blatantly improper – litigation tactics. EchoStar’s spoliation in this action, and the fact that it has been sanctioned for spoliation in previous actions, is precisely the type of offensive conduct that cannot be tolerated by the court. Similarly egregious is EchoStar’s last minute finagling with expert reports, believing that it can play fast and loose with the rules of procedure in order to enhance its litigation posture.”
The trial commenced on September 19, 2012 in the New York State Supreme Court. During the summer of 2012, financial analysts who cover Dish urged the company to settle the lawsuit in advance of the trial, as “the odds would…appear to be heavily in Cablevision’s/AMC’s favor.”
Dish chose to settle. The terms of the settlement required Dish to pay $700 million for spectrum licenses covering 500 megahertz and capable of serving 150 million people.
Fox.
On December 21, 2014, Dish Network dropped Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network. A failed first attempt to reach a deal on the 18th of the same month resulted in the blackout. The two parties blamed each other; Dish said Fox tried to unfairly tie in a sister channel and charge unreasonable rates. Fox pointed out the recent pattern Dish had created with other networks. A deal was finally reached on January 14, 2015 with undisclosed terms.
TiVo patent lawsuit.
On June 3, 2009, satellite service provider EchoStar was found by Marshall, Texas, federal district court judge David Folsom to be in contempt of a permanent injunction against using some of TiVo's technology and was required to pay the DVR pioneer $103.1 million plus interest. On May 3, 2011, Dish Network Corporation and EchoStar Corporation agreed to pay TiVo Inc. $500 million to settle a dispute over the use of some of TiVo’s technology.
This lawsuit took more than ten years to resolve. One of the judges involved said that the conduct of Dish's lawyers didn't “even meet law-school student behavior,” and “presented the saddest day I have seen in my many years in court.”
Bartlit Beck Herman Palenchar & Scott.
Dish sued its own law firm, Bartlit Beck Herman Palenchar & Scott of Chicago, for malpractice. The firm countersued and won a $40 million judgement against Dish. A panel from the American Arbitration Association said that Dish's allegations were "patently false" and "egregious."
Related party transactions.
In 2012, Dish invested $500,000 in a technology startup, Yottabyte Ventures LLC, in which Christoper Ergen, the son of CEO Charlie Ergen, has 7.1 percent equity. Yottabytes develops mobile video applications. At the end of 2012, Dish held 71.4% of that company's equity. In 2011, Dish paid $100,000 to an online marketing company that Chase Ergen, another son of Charlie Ergen, owns 50% of. As part of a reseller agreement, Dish paid another firm owned by Chase Ergen $101,000 during 2010 and 2011. Candy Ergen, Charlie Ergen's wife, is paid between $100,000 to $110,000 per year in consulting fees. Other unnamed children of Ergen received about $25,000 in 2010 and 2011.
These transactions were criticized by analysts. Lev Janashvili, managing director at GMI Ratings, which tracks governance, accounting and other risks in publicly traded companies, said, "These are things to be concerned about because they raise reasonable questions about conflicts of interest and the overall integrity of governance at the company." Janashvili also said, "The investment in Yottabytes Ventures LLC is a classic example of (a related party transaction) that warrants a closer scrutiny of the company's governance practices, especially because this transaction is part of a broader pattern of behaviors that run counter to the interests of shareholders. Dish is a 'controlled company' whose majority shareholder can insulate himself from the opinions of other investors."
Investor relations.
Dish has reportedly been criticized for treating analysts and major shareholders poorly. Craig Moffett, senior analyst of U.S. telecommunications, U.S. cable, and satellite broadcasting at Sanford C. Bernstein once requested time with management to learn about how Dish does business. Ergen told him, “We’re too busy creating value around here to sit down and talk about it. Thanks but no thanks.” Chris Marangi, a money manager for Gamco Investors, which held about 4 millions shares in Dish, said that the company is very uncooperative. He says that despite traveling to Denver frequently has never been able to get a meeting with Ergen or any other Dish senior manager. “They’re probably the least transparent company of any I’ve ever dealt with." Dish sends out press releases on its earnings deliberately late enough to be of little or no use to analysts and investors whom are then forced to sort through complicated filings submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission.

</doc>
<doc id="77786" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77786" title="Ku band">
Ku band

The Ku band (pronunciation: ) is the 12–18 GHz portion of the electromagnetic spectrum in the microwave range of frequencies. This symbol refers to "K-under" (originally )—in other words, the band directly below the K-band. In radar applications, it ranges from 12-18 GHz according to the formal definition of radar frequency band nomenclature in IEEE Standard 521-2002.
Ku band is primarily used for satellite communications, most notably for fixed and broadcast services, and for specific applications such as NASA's Tracking Data Relay Satellite used for both space shuttle and International Space Station (ISS) communications. Ku band satellites are also used for backhauls and particularly for satellite from remote locations back to a television network's studio for editing and broadcasting. The band is split into multiple segments that vary by geographical region by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). NBC was the first television network to uplink a majority of its affiliate feeds via Ku band in 1983.
Some frequencies in this radio band are used for vehicle speed detection by law enforcement, especially in Europe.
Segments and regions.
The Americas.
Segments in most of North and South America are represented by ITU Region 2 from 11.7 to 12.2 GHz (Local Oscillator Frequency (LOF) 10.750 to 11.250 GHz), allocated to the FSS (fixed satellite service), uplink from 14.0 to 14.5 GHz. There are more than 22 FSS Ku band satellites orbiting over North America, each carrying 12 to 48 transponders, 20 to 120 watts per transponder, and requiring a 0.8-m to 1.5-m antenna for clear reception.
The 12.2 to 12.7 GHz (LOF 11.250 to 11.750 GHz) segment is allocated to the BSS (broadcasting satellite service). BSS (DBS direct broadcast satellites) normally carry 16 to 32 transponders of 27 MHz bandwidth running at 100 to 240 watts of power, allowing the use of receiver antennas as small as 18 inches (450 mm).
Europe and Africa.
Segments in those regions are represented by ITU Region 1 and they are, the 11.45 to 11.7 and 12.5 to 12.75 GHz bands are allocated to the FSS (fixed satellite service, uplink 14.0 to 14.5 GHz). In Europe Ku band is used from 10.7 to 12.75 GHz (LOF Low 9.750 GHz, LOF High 10.600 GHz) for direct broadcast satellite services such as those carried by the Astra satellites. The 11.7 to 12.5 GHz segment is allocated to the BSS (broadcasting satellite service).
Australia.
Australia is part of ITU Region 3 and the Australian regulatory environment provides a class license that covers downlinking from 11.70 GHz to 12.75 GHz and uplinking from 14.0 GHz to 14.5 GHz.
Indonesia.
The ITU has categorized Indonesia as Region P, countries with very high rain precipitation. This statement has made many people unsure about using Ku-band (11 – 18 GHz) in Indonesia. If frequencies higher than 10 GHz are used in a heavy rain area, a decrease in communication availability results. This problem can be solved by using an appropriate link budget when designing the wireless communication link. Higher power and the use of a Radome weatherproof enclosure can overcome the loss to rain fade.
Measurements of rain attenuation in Indonesia have been done for satellite communication links in Padang, Cibinong, Surabaya and Bandung. The DAH Model for rain attenuation prediction is valid for Indonesia, in addition to the ITU model. The DAH model has become an ITU recommendation since 2001 (Recommendation No. ITU-R P.618-7). This model can create a 99.7% available link so that Ku-band can be applied in Indonesia.
The use of the Ku-band for satellite communications in tropical regions like Indonesia is becoming more frequent. Several satellites above Indonesia have Ku-band transponders, and even Ka band transponders. Newskies (NSS 6), launched in December 2002 and positioned at 95° East, contains only Ku-band transponders with a footprint on Indonesia (Sumatra, Java, Borneo, Celebes, Bali, Nusa Tenggara, Moluccas). The iPSTAR satellite, launched in 2004 also uses Ku band footprints. Other satellites that provides Ku band covers Indonesia are Palapa D, MEASAT 3/3A, JSAT Corporation JCSAT 4B, AsiaSat 5, ST 2, Chinasat 11, Korea Telecom Koreasat 8/ABS 2 (2nd half 2013).
Others.
Other ITU allocations have been made within the Ku band to the fixed service (microwave towers), radio astronomy service, space research service, mobile service, mobile satellite service, radiolocation service (radar), amateur radio service, and radionavigation. However, not all of these services are actually operating in this band and others are only minor users.
Advantages.
Compared with C-band, Ku band is not similarly restricted in power to avoid interference with terrestrial microwave systems, and the power of its uplinks and downlinks can be increased. This higher power also translates into smaller receiving dishes and points out a generalization between a satellite's transmission and a dish's size. As the power increases, the dish's size can decrease. This is because the purpose of the dish element of the antenna is to collect the incident waves over an area and focus them all onto the antenna's actual receiving element, mounted in front of the dish (and pointed back towards its face); if the waves are more intense, fewer of them need to be collected to achieve the same intensity at the receiving element.
Also, as frequencies increase, parabolic reflectors become more efficient at focusing them. The focusing is equivalent given the size of the reflector is the same with respect to the wavelength. At 12 GHz a 1-meter dish is capable of focusing on one satellite while sufficiently rejecting the signal from another satellite only 2 degrees away. This is important because satellites in FSS (Fixed Satellite Service) service (11.7-12.2 GHz in the U.S.) are only 2 degrees apart. At 4 GHz (C-band) a 3-meter dish is required to achieve this narrow of a focus beam. Note the inverse linear correlation between dish size and frequency. For Ku satellites in DBS (Direct Broadcast Satellite) service (12.2-12.7 GHz in the U.S.) dishes much smaller than 1-meter can be used because those satellites are spaced 9 degrees apart. As power levels on both C and Ku band satellites have increased over the years, dish beam-width has become much more critical than gain.
The Ku band also offers a user more flexibility. A smaller dish size and a Ku band system's freedom from terrestrial operations simplifies finding a suitable dish site. For the end users Ku band is generally cheaper and enables smaller antennas (both because of the higher frequency and a more focused beam). Ku band is also less vulnerable to rain fade than the Ka band frequency spectrum.
The satellite operator's Earth Station antenna does require more accurate position control when operating at Ku band due to its much narrower focus beam compared to C band for a dish of a given size. Position feedback accuracies are higher and the antenna may require a closed loop control system to maintain position under wind loading of the dish surface.
Disadvantages.
There are, however, some disadvantages of Ku band system. Especially at frequencies higher than 10 GHz in heavy rainfall areas, a noticeable degradation occurs, due to the problems caused by and proportional to the amount of rainfall (commonly known as "rain fade"). This problem can be mitigated, however, by deploying an appropriate link budget strategy when designing the satellite network, and allocating a higher power consumption to compensate rain fade loss. The Ku band is not only used for television transmission, which some sources imply, but also very much for digital data transmission via satellites, and for voice/audio transmissions.
The higher frequency spectrum of the Ku band is particularly susceptible to signal degradation, considerably more so than C-band satellite frequency spectrum. A similar phenomenon, called "snow fade" (where snow or ice accumulation significantly alters the focal point of a dish) can also occur during winter precipitation. Also, the Ku band satellites typically require considerably more power to transmit than the C-band satellites. Under both "rain fade" and "snow fade" conditions, Ka and Ku band losses can be marginally reduced using super-hydrophobic Lotus effect coatings. Moreover, snow fade is caused not only by snow accumulation on the antenna, but also by attenuation caused by airborne snow along the RF signal path.

</doc>
<doc id="77787" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77787" title="Juan Antonio Samaranch">
Juan Antonio Samaranch

Juan Antonio Samaranch y Torelló, 1st Marquis of Samaranch (; 17 July 1920 – 21 April 2010), was a Spanish sports administrator and minister of sports under the Franco-regime (1973–1977) who served as the seventh president of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) from 1980 to 2001. Samaranch served the second longest term as the head of the IOC, the longest being that of Pierre de Coubertin (29 years).
Early life.
Juan Antonio Samaranch was born on 17 July 1920 in Barcelona as the third of six children in a family from the Catalan rich bourgeoisie. On 1 December 1955, he married Maria Teresa Salisachs Rowe. With Salisachs Rowe, he had two children: Juan Antonio Junior, currently a member of the International Olympic Committee, and Maria Teresa. In 1991 he received the title of Marqués from the King of Spain for his involvement in the Olympic Movement.
Samaranch completed his studies at the Business School of Barcelona, which he completed in London and the USA, and obtained a diploma from the Barcelona Higher Institute of Business Studies (IESE). During his studies, he practised roller hockey, for which he created World Championships in 1951 and which the Spanish team won. While managing his family's business, he became a city councillor for the City of Barcelona responsible for sport in 1954, then Delegate for Physical Education and Sport in the Spanish Parliament in 1967. Samaranch was appointed President of the “Diputación” (provincial council) of Barcelona in 1973, until he resigned four years later, when he was appointed Spanish Ambassador to the Soviet Union and Mongolia after the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
Maintaining an active career within the Olympic Movement, Samaranch was elected Vice-President of the International Mediterranean Games Committee for the second edition of the Games in Barcelona in 1955. On several occasions, he was appointed Chef de Mission: for the Winter Games in Cortina d’Ampezzo (1956), the Summer Games in Rome (1960), and the Summer Games in Tokyo (1964). For the Rome and Tokyo Games, he was also President of the Spanish delegation. Elected a member of the Spanish Olympic Committee in 1956, he became its President in 1967 until 1970. He was elected as an IOC member in 1966. Two years later, Avery Brundage appointed him Head of Protocol (1968-1975 and 1979-1980). A member of the Executive Board (1970-1978, 1979-1980), he was IOC Vice-President from 1974 to 1978. Elected to the IOC presidency in the first round of voting on 16 July 1980 at the 83rd Session, he succeeded Lord Killanin on 3 August that year.
Juan Antonio Samaranch endeavoured to breathe new life into the Olympic Movement. He acceded to the IOC presidency during the troubled political period of the Games of the XXII Olympiad in Moscow. Above all, he sought to give back unity to the Olympic family by defending its cause on his numerous trips and meetings with heads of state and sports leaders. In 1981, he obtained for the IOC the status of non-governmental international organisation and became the first IOC President, after Pierre de Coubertin, to establish himself in Lausanne. He was also in favour of the feminisation of the Olympic Movement, and during the Baden-Baden Congress gained permission for women to become members of the IOC. At his instigation, the IOC became involved in various initiatives to promote women and sport.
Among his accomplishments are his many activities to promote peace through the Olympic Movement. He managed to include both the NOC of the People’s Republic of China and that of Chinese Taipei; with the assistance of Kéba Mbaye, he contributed to the abolition of apartheid in South Africa and the reintegration of the country in Olympic competitions; he visited Sarajevo during the civil war to express Olympic solidarity; and, thanks to his determination, the two Koreas marched under the same flag at the Opening Ceremony in Sydney.
For sport, he intensified the IOC’s support to organise Paralympic Games as from the Winter Games in Sarajevo in 1984. He also made doping a priority issue by launching vast research and control programmes. The creation of the World Anti-Doping Agency in 1999 allowed the IOC Medical Commission to extend its scope of action. One of the major transformations of the Olympic Movement is undoubtedly the end of amateurism, and professionals’ access to Olympic competitions, in accordance with the vision that Juan Antonio Samaranch gave to the athlete. Finally, it was under his presidency that the Summer and Winter Games were organised every two years, instead of in the same year, still respecting the gap of four years.
Among the reforms to the running of the IOC, he imposed a new financial policy which allowed for the increase in revenues and the diversification of resources. Thanks to a large share of the revenues generated by agreements with TV channels, he restructured Olympic Solidarity in 1981 and provided assistance to National Olympic Committees in difficulty, and developed action plans to contribute to the universality of the Games. Finally, confronted with an IOC crisis in December 1998, created through the abuse of trust of some members following the vote for Salt Lake City as host of the 2002 Winter Games, he reformed the structure of the organisation after an enquiry and sanctions against the members concerned.
On 23 June 1993, the inauguration of the Olympic Museum, representing the memory and spirit of modern Olympism, the work of his career, crowned his presidency.
On 16 July 2001, he left the seat of the IOC presidency to Jacques Rogge and became Honorary President for Life.
He died on the 21st of April 2010 at the age of 89, in Barcelona.
Business and political career.
After the defeat of the Republic in 1939, Samaranch studied commerce at IESE Business School in Barcelona. He had a short career as a sports journalist for "La Prensa", which ended in his dismissal in 1943 for criticizing the supporters of Real Madrid C.F. after that club's 11–1 defeat of FC Barcelona, and then joined his family's textile business. He joined the board of La Caixa, Spain's largest savings bank, in 1984, and served as President of the board from 1987 to 1999. He remained as honorary president from his retirement in 1999 to his death.
Samaranch served on the municipal government of Barcelona, with responsibility for sports, from 1955 to 1962. He was a "procurador" (member of the lower house) of the Cortes Españolas during the last decade of the Franco regime, from 1964 until the restoration of democracy in 1977. From 1967 to 1971, he also served as "national delegate" (minister) for sports, and from 1973 to 1977 he was the president of the "diputación" (governing council) of the Province of Barcelona. He was appointed Spanish ambassador to the Soviet Union and Mongolia in 1977, immediately after the restoration of diplomatic relations between the countries: this post helped him to gain the support of the Soviet bloc countries in the election to the presidency of the IOC, held in Moscow in 1980.
He had been the "chef de mission" of the Spanish team at a number of Olympic events, before he was appointed Government Secretary for Sports by Spanish Head of State Francisco Franco in 1967. He also became the president of the Spanish National Olympic Committee and a member of the IOC. He was vice-president of the IOC from 1974 to 1978.
IOC Presidency.
Samaranch became President elect in 1980 at the 83rd IOC Session (15–18 July) which was held in Moscow prior to the 1980 Summer Olympics – and took office soon after the Games.
During his term, Samaranch made the Olympic Games financially healthy, with big television deals and sponsorships. Although the 1984 Summer Olympics were still boycotted by the Soviet bloc, the number of IOC participating member nations increased at every Games during Samaranch's presidency. Samaranch also wanted the best athletes to compete in the Olympics, which led to the gradual acceptance of professional athletes.
One achievement of Samaranch was the financial rescue of the IOC, which was in financial crisis in the 1970s. The games themselves were such a burden on host cities that it appeared that no host would be found for future Olympiads. Under Samaranch, the IOC revamped its sponsorship arrangements (choosing to go with global sponsors rather than allowing each national federation to take local ones), and new broadcasting deals, commercialising the Olympics and making them more economically viable.
He was awarded the 1990 Seoul Peace Prize.
It became a tradition for Samaranch, when giving the President's address at the close of each Summer Olympics, to praise the organizers at each Olympiad for putting on "the best ever" Games. He withheld this phrase only once, at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta where the organization had come under heavy criticism.
In the aftermath of a bribery scandal surrounding the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah, an inquiry held "in camera" expelled several IOC members, but cleared Samaranch of wrongdoing. Samaranch set up a commission to investigate the corruption and introduced reform of the bid process as a result of the scandal.
In 2001, Samaranch did not apply for the presidency again. He was succeeded by Jacques Rogge. He then became Honorary President for Life of the International Olympic Committee. Samaranch served the second longest term as the head of the IOC, 21 years, the longest being that of Pierre de Coubertin (29 years). Following his retirement, Samaranch played a major role in Madrid's bid for the 2012 and 2016 Olympics, though both were unsuccessful. In 1991, he was raised into the Spanish nobility by King Juan Carlos of Spain and given the hereditary title of "Marqués de Samaranch" ("Marquis of Samaranch"), this in recognition of his contribution to the Olympic movement.
Accused KGB asset.
According to the book "The KGB Plays Chess" (Boris Gulko, Korchnoi, Vladimir Popow and Juri Felschtinski), Samaranch was recruited as an asset by the KGB in exchange for Soviet support for his candidacy as MOK President.
Family.
Samaranch married María Teresa Salisachs Rowe, known as "Bibí" (26 December 193116 September 2000), on 1 December 1955. She died in Spain while he was attending the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. Two children were born of this marriage: his elder child and daughter, María Teresa Samaranch Salisachs (born 1956), has been president of the Spanish Federation of Sports on Ice since 2005, while his younger child and son, Juan Antonio Samaranch Salisachs (born 1959), has been a member of the International Olympic Committee since 2001.
Death.
Samaranch died of cardio-respiratory failure in the Hospital Quirón in Barcelona on 21 April 2010, having suffered ill health for several years prior to his death.
As a recipient of the Gold Medal of the Generalitat of Catalonia, Samaranch was laid in state in the Palau de la Generalitat. His funeral mass was in the Cathedral of Santa Eulalia, on 22 April 2010 and was attended by representatives of the Spanish royal family and of the Olympic movement. He was buried at the Montjuïc Cemetery. After his death, in June 2010 the Olympic and Sports Museum Joan Antoni Samaranch and the Olympic Hall Juan Antonio Samaranch, formerly Olympic Hall Zetra, in Sarajevo were renamed in his honour.

</doc>
<doc id="77788" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77788" title="Albert Uderzo">
Albert Uderzo

Alberto Aleandro Uderzo (; ; born 25 April 1927) is a French comic book artist, and scriptwriter. He is best known for his work on the "Astérix" series and also drew other comics such as "Oumpah-pah", also in collaboration with René Goscinny.
Uderzo retired from drawing in September 2011.
Early life.
Uderzo was born in Fismes (Marne, France), to parents, Silvio (of Venetian descent) and Iria Crestini (of Tuscan descent), who had recently immigrated from La Spezia, Italy. His childhood ambitions were to become an aircraft mechanic, despite his talents in art becoming apparent at an early age.
Uderzo obtained French citizenship in 1934, and during World War II, the teenaged Uderzo left Paris and spent a year in Brittany, where he worked on a farm and helped with his father's furniture business. He was fond of Brittany, both for its scenery and its people. Many years later, when the time came to choose a location for Asterix's village, Goscinny left the decision entirely to Uderzo, only stipulating that it should be near the sea in case the characters needed to travel by boat. Uderzo had no hesitation in choosing Brittany.
Uderzo began a successful career as an artist in Paris after the war in 1945, with creations such as "Flamberge" and also "Clopinard", a small one-legged old man who triumphs against the odds. From 1947 to 1948 he created some other comics, such as "Belloy" and "Arys Buck".
Working with Goscinny.
Throughout some more creations and travelling for the next few years, he eventually met René Goscinny in 1951. The two men quickly became good friends, and decided to work together in 1952 at the newly opened Paris office of the Belgian company, World Press. Their first creations were the characters Oumpah-pah, Jehan Pistolet and Luc Junior. In 1958 they adapted "Oumpah-pah" for serial publication in the Franco-Belgian comics magazine "Tintin", though it ran only until 1962. In 1959 Goscinny and Uderzo became editor and artistic director (respectively) of "Pilote" magazine, a new venture aimed at older children. The magazine's first issue introduced Astérix to the French world, and it was an instant hit. During this period Uderzo also collaborated with Jean-Michel Charlier on the realistic series "Michel Tanguy", later named "Les Aventures de Tanguy et Laverdure".
Astérix was serialised in "Pilote", but in 1961 the first album "Astérix le gaulois (Asterix the Gaul)" was published as an individual album. By 1967, the comic had become so popular that both decided to completely dedicate their time to the series. After Goscinny's death in 1977, Uderzo continued to write and illustrate the books on his own, though at a significantly slower pace (averaging one album every three to five years compared to two albums a year when working with Goscinny). The cover credits still read "Goscinny and Uderzo".
Family.
Uderzo married Ada Milani in 1953 and has one daughter Sylvie Uderzo (b. 1956). According to "The Book of Asterix the Gaul", it was speculated that Uderzo had based the characters Panacea and Zaza on Ada and Sylvie respectively, though this has been denied by Uderzo. When Uderzo sold his share of Editions Albert René to Hachette Livre, Sylvie accused him in a column in "Le Monde", that with this action it was "as if the gates of the Gaulish village had been thrown open to the Roman Empire". Sylvie owns 40% of Editions Albert René, while the remaining 60%, previously owned by Uderzo and by Goscinny's daughter, is currently owned by Hachette Livre.
Uderzo has a brother, Marcel, also a cartoonist.
Asterix and the Falling Sky was dedicated to his late brother Bruno (1920–2004).
Awards.
According to the UNESCO's Index Translationum, Uderzo is the 10th most often translated French language author (Goscinny being 4th) and the third most often translated French language comics author behind René Goscinny and Hergé.

</doc>
<doc id="77793" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77793" title="Tibidabo">
Tibidabo

Tibidabo () is a mountain overlooking Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. At , it is the tallest mountain in the Serra de Collserola. Rising sharply to the north-west, it affords spectacular views over the city and the surrounding coastline.
The summit of the mountain is occupied by the Sagrat Cor church and adjacent Tibidabo Amusement Park. The Torre de Collserola telecommunications tower is a short walk away. All three are prominently visible from most of the city of Barcelona. Designed by Enric Sagnier, the church took 60 years to construct and is topped by a sculpture of the Sacred Heart of Jesus by Josep Miret Llopart.
The Tibidabo Amusement Park, near 7 Ha big, was built by the entrepreneur Salvador Andreu and opened in 1899. Two years later in 1901, the Tramvia Blau tram and the Tibidabo Funicular cable railway began operations. The park is one of the oldest in the world that is still functioning. Most of the original rides, some of which date to the turn of the 20th century, are still in use. Prominent amongst these is the 1928 "Red Aeroplane" ride, a single car carousel giving the impression of flight above the city, a novelty at the time. Riders board a replica of the aircraft that first flew from Barcelona to Madrid. The park was featured in the Woody Allen film, Vicky Cristina Barcelona.
Tibidabo can be reached via the Tibidabo Funicular, which was the first of its kind in Spain, and by the Tramvia Blau or road. The Transports Metropolitans de Barcelona minibus service 111 connects it to Vallvidrera village and the upper station of the Vallvidrera funicular. 
Origin of name.
The name derives from the Latin Vulgate Bible verses:
This phrase, meaning "I will give to you", was said to Jesus by the devil as they looked down from an "exceedingly high mountain" upon "all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them." The name of Barcelona's hill thus refers to the popular tradition that it was in fact the "exceedingly high mountain" itself. The phrase "Tibi dabo" forms part of the inscription in the central dome of St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City, although in that case it was drawn from Jesus' words to St. Peter in .

</doc>
<doc id="77794" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77794" title="Vallvidrera">
Vallvidrera

•Vallvidrera is a neighbourhood of the Sarrià-Sant Gervasi district of Barcelona, Catalonia. It is situated in one of the sides of the Collserola hills, considered to be the lungs of the city due to the abundant forests it has. This wealthy neighbourhood has excellent views of the whole city, from some specific places and in a clear day it is possible to see Mallorca and the Pyrenees on the horizon. Although being a residential place it has important things such as, the Torre de Collserola (a communications tower designed by the architect Norman Foster), the Tibidabo amusement park and the Temple Expiatori del Sagrat Cor (a church).
Vallvidrera used to be a cool summer retreat where wealthy people from Barcelona had their summer houses. Now the wealthy live in this neighbourhood all year round and have their summer retreats in further places inside Catalonia, such as La Costa Brava (for summer vacations) or Puigcerda (for winter vacations).
Vallvidrera can be reached by the Funicular de Vallvidrera, which connects at its lower station with the Metro del Vallès suburban railway with frequent services to the city center. The neighborhood is also served by minibus line 111, which connects to the upper station of the Valvidrera funicular and the top of the Tibidabo hill. Other than the Funicular and the Bus, the most common type of transportation is the private one. It is difficult to set public transport due to a complex curvy roadway that connects this neighbourhood with the city.

</doc>
<doc id="77795" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77795" title="ESPN">
ESPN

ESPN (originally an initialism for Entertainment and Sports Programming Network) is a U.S.-based global cable and satellite television channel owned by ESPN Inc., a joint venture between The Walt Disney Company (which operates the network) and the Hearst Corporation (which owns a 20% minority share).
ESPN broadcasts primarily from studio facilities located in Bristol, Connecticut. The network also operates offices in Miami, New York City, Seattle, Charlotte, and Los Angeles. John Skipper currently serves as president of ESPN, a position he has held since January 1, 2012. While ESPN is one of the most successful sports networks, there has been much criticism of ESPN, which includes accusations of biased coverage, conflict of interest, and controversies with individual broadcasters and analysts.
, ESPN is available to approximately 94,396,000 paid television households (81.1% of households with at least one television set) in the United States. In addition to the flagship channel and its seven related channels in the United States, ESPN broadcasts in more than 200 countries, operating regional channels in Australia, Brazil, Latin America and the United Kingdom, and owning a 20% interest in The Sports Network (TSN) as well as its five sister networks and NHL Network in Canada.
In 2011, ESPN's history and rise was chronicled by "These Guys Have All the Fun", a nonfiction book written by James Andrew Miller and Tom Shales and published by Little, Brown, & Co.
History.
Bill Rasmussen conceived the concept of ESPN in late May 1978, after he was fired from his job with the World Hockey Association's New England Whalers. One of the first steps in Bill and his son Scott's (who had also been let go by the Whalers) process was finding land to build the channel's broadcasting facilities. The Rasmussens first rented office space in Plainville, Connecticut. However, the plan to base ESPN there was put on hold because a local ordinance prohibiting buildings from having satellite dishes installed on them. Available land area was quickly found in Bristol, Connecticut (where the channel remains headquartered to this day), with funding to buy the property provided by Getty Oil, which purchased 85% of the company from Bill Rasmussen on February 22, 1979, in an attempt to diversify the company's holdings. This helped the credibility of the fledgling company, however there were still many doubters to the viability of their sports channel concept. Another event that helped build ESPN's credibility was securing an advertising agreement with Anheuser-Busch in the spring of 1979; the company invested $1 million to be the "exclusive beer advertised on the network."
ESPN launched on September 7, 1979, beginning with the first telecast of what would become the channel's flagship program, "SportsCenter". Taped in front of a small live audience inside the Bristol studios, it was broadcast to 1.4 million cable subscribers throughout the United States.
ESPN's next big break came when the channel acquired the rights to broadcast coverage of the early rounds of the NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament. It first aired the NCAA tournament in March 1980, creating the modern day television event known as "March Madness". The channel's tournament coverage also launched the broadcasting career of Dick Vitale, who at the time he joined ESPN, had just been fired as head coach of the Detroit Pistons.
In April of that year, ESPN created another made-for-TV spectacle, when it began televising the NFL Draft. It provided complete coverage of the event that allowed rookie players from the college ranks to launch their brands in front of a national television audience in ways they were not able to previously.
The next major stepping stone for ESPN came over the course of a couple of months in 1984. During this time period, the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) purchased 100% of ESPN from the Rasmussens and Getty Oil. Under Getty ownership, the channel was unable to compete for the television rights to major sports events contracts as its majority corporate parent would not provide the funding, leading ESPN to lose out for broadcast deals with the National Hockey League (to USA Network) and NCAA Division I college football (to TBS). For years, the NFL, NBA and Major League Baseball refused to consider cable as a means of broadcasting some of their games. However, with the backing of ABC, ESPN's ability to compete for major sports contracts greatly increased, and gave it credibility within the sports broadcasting industry.
Later in 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the NCAA could no longer monopolize the rights to negotiate the contracts for college football games, allowing each individual school to negotiate broadcast deals of their choice. ESPN took full advantage and began to broadcast a large number of NCAA football games, creating an opportunity for fans to be able to view multiple games each weekend (instead of just one), the same deal that the NCAA had previously negotiated with TBS. ESPN's breakthrough moment occurred in 1987, when it secured a contract with the NFL to broadcast eight games during that year's regular season – all of which aired on Sunday nights, marking the first broadcasts of Sunday NFL primetime games. ESPN's "Sunday Night Football" games would become the highest-rated NFL telecasts for the next 17 years (before losing the rights to NBC in 2006). The channel's decision to broadcast NFL games on Sunday evenings actually resulted in a decline in viewership for the daytime games shown on the major broadcast networks, marking the first time that ESPN had been a legitimate competitor to NBC and CBS, which had long dominated the sports television market.
In 1992, ESPN launched ESPN Radio, a national sports talk radio network providing analysis and commentary programs (including shows such as "Mike and Mike in the Morning" and "The Herd") as well as audio play-by-play of sporting events (including some broadcast by the ESPN television channel).
On October 10, 1993, ESPN2 – a secondary channel that originally was programmed with a separate lineup of niche sports popular with males 18–49 years old (with snowboarding and the World Series of Poker as its headliners) as well as serving as an overflow channel for ESPN – launched on cable systems reaching to 10 million subscribers. It became the fastest growing cable channel in the U.S. during the 1990s, eventually expanding its national reach to 75 million subscribers.
Ownership of ABC, and in effect control of ESPN, was acquired first by Capital Cities Communications in 1985, and then by The Walt Disney Company in 1996. In 2012, ESPN generated more revenue for Disney than any of its other properties combined.
Programming.
Alongside its live sports broadcasts, ESPN also airs a variety of sports highlight, talk, and documentary-styled shows. These include:
Many of ESPN's documentary programs (such as "30 for 30" and "Nine for IX") are produced by ESPN Films, a film division created in March 2008 as a restructuring of ESPN Original Entertainment, a programming division that was originally formed in 2001. 30 for 30 started airing in 2009 and continues airing to this day. Each episode is through the eyes of a well known filmmaker and has featured some of the biggest directors in Hollywood.
Since September 2006, ESPN has been integrated with the sports division of sister broadcast network ABC, with sports events televised on that network airing under the banner ESPN on ABC; much of ABC's sports coverage since the rebranding has become increasingly limited to secondary coverage of sporting events whose broadcast rights are held by ESPN (such as NBA games, The Open Championship, and the X Games and its related qualifying events) as well as a limited array of event coverage not broadcast on ESPN (most notably, the NBA Finals).
Related channels.
ESPN2.
ESPN2 launched on October 1, 1993, originally formatted as a more informal and youth-oriented channel than ESPN aimed at adults between 18 and 34 years of age, carrying a broad mix of event coverage from conventional sports (such as auto racing, college basketball and NHL hockey) to extreme sports (such as BMX, skateboarding and motocross). The "ESPN BottomLine," a ticker displaying sports news and scores during all programming that is now used by all of ESPN's networks, originated on ESPN2 in 1995. In the late 1990s, ESPN2 was gradually reformatted to serve as a secondary outlet for ESPN's mainstream sports programming.
ESPN Classic.
ESPN Classic is a digital cable and satellite television network that launched in 1995 as Classic Sports Network, founded by Brian Bedol and Steve Greenberg. ESPN Inc. purchased Classic Sports Network in 1997 for $175 million, rebranding the channel to its current name the following year. The channel broadcasts notable archived sporting events (originally including events from past decades, but now focusing mainly on events from the 1990s and later), sports documentaries and sports-themed movies.
ESPNews.
ESPNews is a digital cable and satellite television network that was launched on November 1, 1996, originally focusing solely on sports news, highlights and press conferences. Since August 2010, the network has gradually incorporated encores of ESPN's various sports debate and entertainment shows and video simulcasts of ESPN Radio shows, in addition to sports news programming (which since the 2013 cancellation of "Highlight Express", consists mainly of additional runs of "SportsCenter"); ESPNews also serves as an overflow feed due to programming conflicts caused by sporting events on the other ESPN networks.
ESPN+.
ESPN+ is a digital cable and satellite television network that launched in 2002, this signal is seen in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Bolivia, Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and from November 21, 2013, also in Venezuela. ESPN + signal displays events in these sports: Football, Tennis, Rugby, Cycling, Baseball, Horse Riding, Hockey and sports programs about: Football, Tennis, Rugby, Polo, Hockey, Motor, etc. It is divided into two signals: Atlantic and Pacific.
ESPN Deportes.
ESPN Deportes (, "ESPN Sports") is a digital cable and satellite television network that was originally launched in July 2001 to provide Spanish language simulcasts of certain Major League Baseball telecasts from ESPN. It became a 24-hour sports channel in January 2004.
ESPNU.
ESPNU is a digital cable and satellite television network that launched on March 4, 2005, and focuses on college athletics including basketball, football, baseball college swimming, and hockey.
Longhorn Network.
The Longhorn Network is a digital cable and satellite television network that was launched on August 26, 2011, focusing on events from the Texas Longhorns varsity sports teams of the University of Texas at Austin. It features events from the 20 sports sanctioned by the Texas Longhorns athletics department, along with original programming (including historical, academic and cultural content).
SEC Network.
SEC Network is a digital cable and satellite television network that launched on August 14, 2014, focusing on the coverage of sporting events sanctioned by the Southeastern Conference. Created as a result of a 20-year broadcast partnership between the two entities, the network is a joint venture between the conference and ESPN Inc. (which operates the network).
In popular culture.
ESPN has been a part of popular culture since its inception. Many movies with a general sports theme will include ESPN announcers and programming into their storylines such as in the 2004 comedy "", which gently lampoons the channel's multiple outlets by referencing the fictional ESPN8, "The Ocho", a reference to a nickname formerly used by ESPN2, "the Deuce".
Many jokes have been made by comedians about fake obscure sports that are shown on ESPN. Dennis Miller mentioned watching "sumo rodeo", while George Carlin stated that ESPN showed "Australian dick wrestling". One of several "Saturday Night Live" sketches poking fun at the network features a fictional ESPN2 program called "Scottish Soccer Hooligan Weekly", which includes a fake advertisement for "Senior Women's Beach Lacrosse". "SNL" also parodies ESPN Classic with fake archived obscure women's sports event telecasts from the 1980s (such as bowling, weightlifting and curling), with announcers who know nothing about the sport, and instead focus on the sponsors, which were always for feminine hygiene products. In the early years of ESPN, "Late Night with David Letterman" even featured a "Top Ten List" segment poking fun at some of the obscure sports seen on ESPN at the time. One of the more memorable sports on the list was "Amish Rake Fighting". A recurring skit on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" named "Sports Freak-Out!" is a parody of "SportsCenter"s overexcited anchors.
An occasional joke used in comedic television and film involves people getting ESP (the common abbreviation for extrasensory perception, that was coincidentally the working abbreviation for the channel prior to its launch) confused with ESPN, often including someone saying a sentence along the lines of "I know these kind of things, I've got ESPN". Sports video game releases by Electronic Arts in the early 1990s featured a logo for a fictional sports network, EASN (Electronic Arts Sports Network); this was soon changed to EA Sports after ESPN requested that the company stop using the similar name. There are also at least 22 children that are named after the network.
Criticism.
Throughout its history, ESPN has received accusations of biased coverage, conflicts of interest and controversies with individual broadcasters and analysts. ESPN has been criticized for focusing too much on college and professional football and basketball, while not showing enough hockey or women's athletics.

</doc>
<doc id="77796" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77796" title="Montjuïc">
Montjuïc

Montjuïc (; Spanish spelling "Montjuich") is a hill in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Etymology.
Montjuïc is translated as "Jew Mountain" in medieval Catalan, or is perhaps related to the Latin phrase "Mons Jovicus" ('hill of Jove'). A location of the same name is also found in the city of Girona. When written in a Spanish rather than Catalan context it is generally spelled Montjuich (this is old Catalan spelling before the orthographic reforms of Pompeu Fabra).
Description.
Barcelona's Montjuïc is a broad shallow hill with a relatively flat top overlooking the harbour, to the southwest of the city centre. The eastern side of the hill is almost a sheer cliff, giving it a commanding view over the city's harbour immediately below. The top of the hill (a height of 184,8 m) was the site of several fortifications, the latest of which (the Castle of Montjuïc) remains today. The fortress largely dates from the 17th century, with 18th-century additions. In 1842, the garrison (loyal to the Madrid government) shelled parts of the city. It served as a prison, often holding political prisoners, until the time of General Franco. The castle was also the site of numerous executions. In 1897, an incident popularly known as "Els processos de Montjuïc" prompted the execution of anarchist supporters, which then led to a severe repression of the workers' struggle for their rights. On different occasions during the Spanish Civil War, both Nationalists and Republicans were executed there, each at the time when the site was held by their opponents. The Catalan nationalist leader Lluís Companys i Jover was also executed there in 1940, having been extradited to the Franco government by the Nazis.
Developments.
Naturally wooded, the slopes of the Montjuïc were traditionally used to grow food and graze animals by the people of the neighbouring Ciutat Vella. In the 1890s, the forests were partially cleared, opening space for parklands. The site was selected to host the 1929 International Exposition (a World's Fair), for which the first large-scale construction on the hill began. The surviving buildings from this effort include the grand Palau Nacional, the Estadi Olímpic (the Olympic stadium), the ornate Font Màgica fountains, and a grand staircase leading up from the foot of Montjuïc at the south end of the Avinguda de la Reina Maria Cristina, past the Font Màgica and through the Plaça del Marquès de Foronda and the Plaça de les Cascades to the Palau Nacional. The Poble Espanyol, a "Spanish village" of different buildings built in different styles of Spanish architecture, also survives, located on the western side of the hill. Mies van der Rohe's German national pavilion was constructed at the foot of the hill, near the Plaça del Marquès de Foronda. It was demolished in 1930 but was rebuilt in 1988.
Also completed in 1929, the Olympic stadium was intended to host an anti-fascist alternative Olympics in 1936, in opposition to the 1936 Berlin Olympics. These plans were cancelled due to the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. The stadium served as the home for football team Espanyol, until the club left for a new stadium in Cornellà/El Prat upon its completion in 2008.
The roads in the slopes facing the city were once the Montjuïc circuit Formula One race track, hosting the Spanish Grand Prix on four occasions. However, a terrible accident in the 1975 race saw Rolf Stommelen's car crash into the stands, killing four people; as a result the Spanish Grand Prix never returned to Montjuïc circuit.
The Montjuïc was selected as the site for several of the venues of the 1992 Summer Olympics, centred on the Olympic stadium. Extensively refurbished and renamed the Estadi Olímpic Lluís Companys, the 65,000-seat stadium saw the opening and closing ceremonies and hosted the athletic events. Around it the "Anella Olímpica" (the "Olympic Ring") of sporting venues was built, including the Palau Sant Jordi indoor arena, the "Institut Nacional d'Educació Física de Catalunya", a centre of sports science; the "Piscines Bernat Picornell" and the "Piscina Municipal de Montjuïc", the venues for swimming and diving events respectively; and the striking telecommunications tower, designed by the architect Santiago Calatrava. Of the "Piscines" (swimmimg pools), the diving pool was selected as the setting for the "Slow" music video recorded in 2003 by the Australian artist Kylie Minogue.
The ornate Palau Nacional houses the Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya, an extensive showcase of Catalan painting and sculpture.
The top of the hill can be reached using the Funicular de Montjuïc, a funicular railway that operates as part of the Barcelona Metro, and then a gondola lift. On the eastern slope is the "Miramar" terminal of the Port Vell Aerial Tramway connecting Montjuïc with Barceloneta on the other side of Port Vell. Part of the slopes are covered with a well attended park and gardens. The hill is often used for amateur cycling.
Prototype metre.
In June 1792 the French astronomers Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre and Pierre François André Méchain set out to measure the meridian arc distance from Dunkirk to Barcelona, two cities lying on approximately the same longitude as each other and also the longitude through Paris. The fortress on Montjuïc was chosen as the reference point in Barcelona. After protracted negotiations (France and Spain were technically at war) Méchain made his measurements from the fortress on 16 March 1794.
Using this measurement and the latitudes of the two cities they could calculate the distance between the North Pole and the Equator in classical French units of length and hence produce the first prototype metre which was defined as being one ten millionth of that distance. The definitive metre bar, manufactured from platinum, was presented to the French legislative assembly on 22 June 1799.
Musical tributes.
In 1936 the British composers Lennox Berkeley and Benjamin Britten visited a folk dance festival on the mountain while attending a music festival in Barcelona. They took down the melodies and the following year they jointly wrote a suite of four Catalan dances for orchestra, which they named "Mont Juic".

</doc>
<doc id="77799" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77799" title="C-SPAN">
C-SPAN

C-SPAN (), an acronym for Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network, is an American cable and satellite television network that was created in 1979 by the cable television industry as a public service. C-SPAN televises many proceedings of the United States federal government, as well as other public affairs programming. The C-SPAN network includes three television channels (C-SPAN, C-SPAN2 and C-SPAN3), one radio station (WCSP-FM) and a group of websites that provide streaming media and archives of C-SPAN programs. C-SPAN's television channels are available to approximately 100 million cable and satellite households within the United States, while WCSP-FM, also called C-SPAN Radio, is broadcast on FM radio in Washington, D.C., and is available throughout the U.S. on XM Satellite Radio, via Internet streaming, and through apps for iOS, BlackBerry and Android devices.
The network televises U.S. political events, particularly live and "gavel-to-gavel" coverage of the U.S. Congress as well as occasional proceedings of the Canadian, Australian and British Parliaments and major events worldwide. Its coverage of political and policy events is unedited, thereby providing viewers (or listeners) with unfiltered information about politics and government. Non-political coverage includes historical programming, programs dedicated to non-fiction books, and interview programs with noteworthy individuals associated with public policy. C-SPAN is a private, nonprofit organization, funded by a 6¢ per subscriber affiliate fee paid by its cable and satellite affiliates, and does not have advertisements on any of its networks, radio stations, or websites, nor does it ever solicit donations or pledges. The network operates independently, and neither the cable industry nor Congress has control of the content of its programming.
History.
Development.
Brian Lamb, C-SPAN's chairman and former chief executive officer, first conceived the concept of C-SPAN in 1975 while working as the Washington, D.C. bureau chief of the cable industry trade magazine "Cablevision". It was a time of rapid growth in the number of cable television channels available in the United States, and Lamb envisioned a cable-industry financed nonprofit network for televising sessions of the U.S. Congress and other public affairs event and policy discussions. Lamb shared his idea with several cable executives, who helped him launch the network. Among them were Bob Rosencrans who provided $25,000 of initial funding in 1979 and John D. Evans who provided the wiring and access to the headend needed for the distribution of the C-SPAN signal.
C-SPAN was launched on March 19, 1979, in time for the first televised session made available by the House of Representatives, beginning with a speech by then-Tennessee representative Al Gore. Upon its debut, only 3.5 million homes were wired for C-SPAN, and the network had just three employees. The second C-SPAN channel, C-SPAN2, followed on June 2, 1986 when the U.S. Senate permitted itself to be televised. C-SPAN3, the most recent expansion channel, began full-time operations on January 22, 2001, and shows other public policy and government-related live events on weekdays along with weekend historical programming. C-SPAN3 is the successor of a digital channel called C-SPAN Extra, which was launched in the Washington D.C. area in 1997, and televised live and recorded political events from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time Monday through Friday.
C-SPAN Radio began operations on October 9, 1997, covering similar events as the television networks and often simulcasting their programming. The station broadcasts on WCSP (90.1 FM) in Washington, D.C., is also available on XM Satellite Radio channel 120 and is streamed live at c-span.org. It was formerly available on Sirius Satellite Radio from 2002 to 2006.
Lamb semi-retired in March 2012, coinciding with the channel's 33rd anniversary, and gave executive control of the network to his two lieutenants, Rob Kennedy and Susan Swain.
Anniversaries.
C-SPAN celebrated its 10th anniversary in 1989 with a three-hour retrospective, featuring Lamb recalling the development of the network. The 15th anniversary was commemorated in an unconventional manner as the network facilitated a series of re-enactments of the seven historic Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858, which were televised from August to October 1994, and have been rebroadcast from time to time ever since. Five years later, the series "", which won a Peabody Award, served as a year-long observation of C-SPAN's 20th anniversary.
In 2004, C-SPAN celebrated its 25th anniversary, by which time the flagship network was viewed in 86 million homes, C-SPAN2 was in 70 million homes and C-SPAN3 was in eight million homes. On the anniversary date, C-SPAN repeated the first televised hour of floor debate in the House of Representatives from 1979 and, throughout the month, 25th anniversary features included "then and now" segments with journalists who had appeared on C-SPAN during its early years. Also included in the 25th anniversary was an essay contest for viewers to write in about how C-SPAN has influenced their life regarding community service. For example, one essay contest winner wrote about how C-SPAN's non-fiction book programming serves as a resource in his charitable mission to record non-fiction audio books for people who are blind.
To commemorate 25 years of taking viewer telephone calls, in 2005, C-SPAN had a 25-hour "call-in marathon", from 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time on Friday, October 7, concluding at 9:00 p.m. Eastern Time on Saturday, October 8. The network also had a viewer essay contest, the winner of which was invited to host an hour of the broadcast from C-SPAN's Capitol Hill studios.
Scope and limitations of coverage.
C-SPAN continues to expand its coverage of government proceedings, with a history of requests to government officials for greater access, especially to the U.S. Supreme Court. In December 2009, Lamb wrote to leaders in the House and Senate, requesting that negotiations for health care reform be televised by C-SPAN. Committee meetings on health care were broadcast subsequently by C-SPAN and may be viewed on the C-SPAN website. In November 2010, Lamb wrote to incoming House Speaker John Boehner requesting changes to restrictions on cameras in the House. In particular, C-SPAN asked to add some of its own robotically operated cameras to the existing government-controlled cameras in the House chamber. In February 2011, Boehner denied the request. A previous request to Speaker Designate Nancy Pelosi in 2006, to add C-SPAN's cameras in the House chamber to record floor proceedings, was also denied. Although C-SPAN uses the congressional chamber feed cables, the cameras are owned and controlled by each respective body of Congress. Requests by C-SPAN for camera access to non-government events such as the annual dinner by the Gridiron Club have also been denied.
Expansion and technology.
Since the late 1990s, C-SPAN has significantly expanded its online presence. In January 1997, C-SPAN began real-time streaming of C-SPAN and C-SPAN2 on its website, the first time that Congress had been live streamed online. To cover the Democratic and Republican conventions and the presidential debates of 2008, C-SPAN created two standalone websites: the Convention Hub and the Debate Hub. In addition to real-time streams of C-SPAN's television networks online, c-span.org features further live programming such as committee hearings and speeches that are broadcast later in the day, after the House and Senate have left.
C-SPAN began promoting audience interaction early in its history, by the regular incorporation of viewer telephone calls in its programming. It has since expanded into social media. In March 2009, viewers began submitting questions live via Twitter to guests on C-SPAN's morning call-in show "Washington Journal". The network also has a Facebook page to which it added occasional live streaming in January 2011. The live stream is intended to show selected well-publicized events of Congress. In June 2010, C-SPAN joined with the website Foursquare to provide users of the application with access to geotagged C-SPAN content at various locations in Washington, D.C.
In 2010, C-SPAN began a transition to high definition telecasts, planned to take place over an 18-month period. The network provided C-SPAN and C-SPAN2 in high definition on June 1, 2010, and C-SPAN3 in July 2010.
Programming.
Senate and House of Representatives.
The C-SPAN network's core programming is live coverage of the U.S. House and Senate, with the C-SPAN channel emphasizing the United States House of Representatives. Between 1979 and May 2011, the network televised more than 24,246 hours of floor action. C-SPAN2, the first of the C-SPAN spin-off networks, provides uninterrupted live coverage of the United States Senate. With coverage of the House and Senate, viewers can track legislation as it moves through both bodies of Congress. Important debates in Congress that C-SPAN has covered live include the Persian Gulf conflict during 1991, and the House impeachment vote and Senate trial of President Bill Clinton in 1998 and 1999. When the House or Senate are not in session, C-SPAN channels broadcast other public affairs programming.
Public affairs.
The public affairs coverage on the C-SPAN networks other than the House and Senate floor debates is wide-ranging. C-SPAN is considered a useful source of information for journalists, lobbyists, educators and government officials as well as casual viewers interested in politics, due to its unedited coverage of political events. C-SPAN has been described by media observers as a "window into the world of Washington politics" and it characterizes its own mission as being "to provide public access to the political process". The networks cover U.S. political campaigns, including the Republican, Democratic, and Libertarian presidential nominating conventions in their entirety. Coverage of presidential campaign events are provided during the duration of the campaign, both by a weekly television program, "Road to the White House", and at its dedicated politics website. C-SPAN also covers midterm elections.
All three channels televise events such as congressional hearings, White House press briefings and presidential speeches, as well as other government meetings including Federal Communications Commission hearings and Pentagon press conferences. Other U.S. political coverage includes State of the Union speeches, and presidential press conferences. According to the results of a survey after the 1992 presidential election, 85% of C-SPAN viewers voted in that election. The results of a similar survey in 2013 found that 89% of C-SPAN viewers voted in the 2012 presidential election. In addition to this political coverage, the network broadcasts press conferences and meetings of various news media and nonprofit organizations, including those at the National Press Club, public policy seminars and the White House Correspondents' Dinner. While C-SPAN does not have video access to the Supreme Court, the network has used the Court's audio recordings accompanied by still photographs of the justices and lawyers to cover the Court in session on significant cases, and has covered individual Supreme Court justices' speaking engagements.
Occasionally, proceedings of the Parliament of Australia, Parliament of Canada, Parliament of the United Kingdom (usually Prime Minister's Questions and the State Opening of Parliament) and other governments are shown on C-SPAN when they discuss matters of importance to viewers in the U.S. Similarly, the networks will sometimes broadcast news reports from around the world when major events occur – for instance, C-SPAN broadcast CBC Television coverage of the September 11 attacks. C-SPAN also covers lying in state in the Capitol Rotunda and funerals of former presidents and other notable individuals. In 2005, C-SPAN covered Hurricane Katrina through NBC affiliate WDSU in New Orleans, as well as coverage of Hurricane Ike via CBS affiliate KHOU in Houston. C-SPAN also carries CBC coverage during events that affect Canadians, such as the Canadian federal elections, the death and state funeral of Pierre Trudeau, and the 2003 North America blackout. During early 2011, C-SPAN carried broadcasts by Al Jazeera to cover the events in Egypt, Tunisia, and other Arab nations. Additionally, C-SPAN simulcasts NASA Space Shuttle mission launches and landings live, using video footage and audio sourced from NASA TV.
With its public affairs programming, C-SPAN intends to offer different points of view, by allowing time for multiple opinions to be discussed on a given topic. For example, in 2004 C-SPAN intended to televise a speech by Holocaust historian Deborah Lipstadt adjacent to a speech by Holocaust denier David Irving, who had unsuccessfully sued Lipstadt for libel in the United Kingdom four years earlier; C-SPAN was criticized for its use of the word "balance" to describe the plan to cover both Lipstadt and Irving. When Lipstadt ended media access to her speech, C-SPAN canceled coverage of both.
The network strives for neutrality and a lack of bias; in all programming when on-camera hosts are present their role is simply to facilitate and explain proceedings to the viewer. Due to this policy, no C-SPAN host has said his or her own name on television.
C-SPAN and C-SPAN2 flagship programs.
While many hours of programming on C-SPAN are dedicated to coverage of the House, the network's daily programming begins with the political telephone call-in and interview program "Washington Journal" every morning from 7:00 to 10:00 a.m. Eastern Time. "Washington Journal" premiered on January 4, 1995 and has been broadcast every weekday morning since then, with guests including elected officials, government administrators, and journalists. The program covers current events, with guests answering questions on topics provided by the hosts as well as from members of the general public. On the weekend schedule, C-SPAN's main programs are: "America and the Courts", which is shown each Saturday at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time, "Newsmakers", a Sunday morning interview program with newsworthy guests; "Q&A", a Sunday evening interview program hosted by Brian Lamb, with guests including journalists, politicians, authors, and other public figures; and "The Communicators", which features interviews with journalists, government officials, and businesspeople involved with the communications industry and related legislation.
On weekends C-SPAN2 dedicates its schedule to "Book TV", which is 48 hours of programming about non-fiction books, book events, and authors. "Book TV" was first launched in September 1998. "Booknotes" was originally broadcast from 1989 to 2004, as a one-hour one-on-one interview of a non-fiction author. Repeats of the interviews remain a regular part of the "Book TV" schedule with the title "Encore Booknotes". Other "Book TV" programs feature political and historical books and biographies of public figures. These include "In Depth", a live, monthly, three-hour interview with a single author, and "After Words", an author interview program featuring guest hosts interviewing authors on topics with which both are familiar. "After Words" was developed as a new type of author interview program after the end of production of "Booknotes". Weekend programming on "Book TV" also includes coverage of book events such as panel discussions, book fairs, book signings, readings by authors and tours of bookstores around the U.S.
C-SPAN3.
The programming on C-SPAN3 from Monday through Friday features uninterrupted live public affairs events, in particular political events from Washington, D.C. Each weekend since January 8, 2011, the network has broadcast 48 hours of programming dedicated to the history of the United States, under the umbrella title "American History TV". The programming covers the history of the U.S. from the founding of the nation through the late 20th century. Programs include "American Artifacts", which is dedicated to exploring museums, archives and historical sites, and "Lectures in History", featuring major university history professors giving lectures on U.S. history. In 2009, C-SPAN3 aired an eight-installment series of interviews from the Robert J. Dole Institute of Politics at the University of Kansas, which featured historian Richard Norton Smith and Vice President Walter Mondale, among other interviewees.
Special programming.
C-SPAN has occasionally produced spinoff programs from "Booknotes" focusing on specific topics. In 1994, "Booknotes" collaborated with Lincoln scholar Harold Holzer to produce re-creations of the seven Lincoln–Douglas debates. Several years later, retraced the journey of Alexis de Tocqueville described in "Democracy in America". Another special series was "", a 38-week tour of the U.S. based on the works of 40 famous American writers.
During 2008 and 2009, as part of programming specially commissioned for the 200th anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln, C-SPAN produced a series titled "Lincoln 200 Years", which featured episodes on a variety of topics relating to the life of Lincoln including his career, his homes and his opinions of slavery.
The network has also produced special feature documentaries of American institutions and historical landmarks, exploring their history to the present day. These programs include: "The Capitol" emphasizing the history, art, and architecture of the U.S. Capitol Building; "The White House", featuring film footage inside the White House and exploring the history of the building and its occupants; "The Supreme Court", focusing on the history and personalities of the court; and "Inside Blair House", an examination of the president's guest house.
In 2013, C-SPAN introduced a new program, "". 35 episodes profiling the First Ladies are planned for the series, which was created with support from the White House Historical Association.
Radio broadcasts.
In addition to the three television networks, C-SPAN also broadcasts via C-SPAN Radio, which is carried on their owned-and-operated station WCSP (90.1 FM) in the Washington, D.C. area with all three cable network feeds airing via HD Radio subchannels, and nationwide on XM Satellite Radio. Its programming is also livestreamed at c-span.org and is available via apps for iPhone, BlackBerry and Android devices. C-SPAN Radio has a selective policy regarding its broadcast content, rather than duplicating the television network programming, although it does offer some audio simulcasts of programs such as "Washington Journal". Unique programming on the radio station includes oral histories, and some committee meetings and press conferences not shown on television due to programming commitments. The station also compiles the Sunday morning talk shows for a same-day rebroadcast without commercials, in rapid succession.
Availability online.
C-SPAN archival video is available through the C-SPAN Video Library, maintained at the Purdue Research Park in West Lafayette, Indiana. First unveiled in August 2007, the C-SPAN Video Library contains all of the network's programming since 1987, totaling more than 160,000 hours at its completion of digitization and public debut in March 2010. Older C-SPAN programming continues to be added to the library, dating back to the beginning of the network in 1979, and some limited earlier footage from the National Archives, such as film clips of Richard Nixon's 1972 trip to China, is available as well. Most of the recordings before 1987 (when the C-SPAN Archive was established) were not saved, except for approximately 10,000 hours of video which are slated to be made available online. As of June 2013, the C-SPAN Video Library held approximately 200,000 hours of programming. Described by media commentators as a major educational service and a valuable resource for researchers of politics and history, the C-SPAN Video Library has also had a major role in media and opposition research in several U.S. political campaigns. It won a Peabody Award in 2010 "for creating an enduring archive of the history of American policymaking, and for providing it as a free, user-friendly public service."
Prior to the initiation of the C-SPAN Video Library, websites such as Metavid and voterwatch.org hosted House and Senate video records, however C-SPAN contested Metavid's usage of C-SPAN copyrighted footage. The result was Metavid's removal of portions of the archive produced with C-SPAN's cameras, while preserving its archive of government-produced content. C-SPAN also engaged in actions to stop parties from making unauthorized uses of its content online, including its video of House and Senate proceedings. Most notably, in May 2006, C-SPAN requested the removal of Stephen Colbert's performance at the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner from YouTube. After concerns by some webloggers, C-SPAN gave permission for Google Video to host the full event. On March 7, 2007 C-SPAN liberalized its copyright policy for current, future, and past coverage of any official events sponsored by Congress and any federal agency and now allows for attributed non-commercial copying, sharing, and posting of C-SPAN video on the Internet, excluding re-syndication of live video streams. The new policy did not affect the public's right to use the public domain video coverage of the floor proceedings of the U.S. House and Senate.
In 2008, C-SPAN's online political coverage was expanded just prior to the elections, with the introduction of three special pages on the C-SPAN website: the C-SPAN Convention Hubs and C-SPAN Debate Hub, which offered video of major events as well as discussion from weblogs and social media about the major party conventions and candidate debates. C-SPAN brought back the Convention Hub for the 2012 presidential election.
In addition to the programming available in the C-SPAN Video Library, all C-SPAN programming is available as a live feed streamed on its website in Flash Video format.
On July 29, 2014, C-SPAN announced that it would begin restricting access to the live feeds of the main channel, C-SPAN2 and C-SPAN3 to subscribers of cable or satellite providers later that summer, citing concerns with the slow shift in viewing habits from cable television to the internet due to its reliance on carriage fees from cable and satellite providers. However, it will continue to allow all government meetings, hearings and conferences to be streamed live online and via archived on the C-SPAN Video Library without requiring an authenticated login by a provider. The decision drew some criticism from public interest and government transparency advocates, citing the fact that C-SPAN was designed as a public service.
Organization and operations.
C-SPAN is operated by the National Cable Satellite Corporation, a nonprofit organization, the board of directors of which consists primarily of representatives of the largest cable companies. Early chairmen of C-SPAN include Bob Rosencrans, John Saeman, Ed Allen and Gene Schneider. Funding for C-SPAN does not derive from advertising; instead, it receives nearly all of its funding from subscriber fees charged to cable and direct-broadcast satellite (DBS) operators.
As of 2012, C-SPAN received 6¢ of each subscriber's cable bill for an annual budget of $60 million. As the network is an independent entity, neither the cable industry nor Congress controls the content of its programming.
, the network has 282 employees. C-SPAN is led by co-CEOs Rob Kennedy and Susan Swain. Founder and former CEO Brian Lamb serves as the executive chairman of the board of directors. The majority of C-SPAN's employees are based at C-SPAN's headquarters located on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., however in 2003 television studios were opened in New York and Denver, Colorado. These studios use digital equipment that can be controlled from Washington.
C-SPAN also maintains archives in West Lafayette, Indiana at the Purdue Research Park under the direction of Dr. Robert X. Browning.
Audience.
The C-SPAN networks are available in more than 100 million households , not including access to the C-SPAN websites. More than 7,000 telephone callers have participated with discussion on "Washington Journal" . There are not any official viewing statistics for C-SPAN because the network, which has no commercials or underwriting advertisements, does not use the Nielsen ratings. However, there have been a number of surveys providing estimates: 
Public and media opinion.
A 2009 C-SPAN survey of viewers found that the network's most-valued attribute was its balanced programming. The survey's respondents were a mixed group, with 31% describing themselves as "liberal," while 28% described themselves as "conservative", and the survey found that C-SPAN viewers are an equal mixture of men and women of all age groups.
C-SPAN's public service nature has been praised as an enduring contribution to national knowledge. In 1987, Andrew Rosenthal wrote for "The New York Times" about C-SPAN's influence in political elections, arguing that C-SPAN's "blanket coverage" had expanded television journalism "into areas once shielded from general view". The network has received positive media coverage for providing public access to proceedings such as the Goldman Sachs Senate hearings, and the U.S. 2010 Healthcare Summit, while its everyday programming has been credited with providing the media and the general public with an intimate knowledge of U.S. political proceedings and people. The ability of C-SPAN to provide this service without federal funding, advertising or soliciting viewer contributions has been remarked by local newspapers and online news services, with the "Daily Beast" terming C-SPAN's $55 million annual budget (in 2009), "an astounding bargain." In an article on the 25th anniversary of the network, "The Washington Post" noted that C-SPAN's programming has been copied by television networks worldwide and credits the network with providing information about foreign politics to American viewers. According to "The New York Times", C-SPAN's mission to record official events in Washington, D.C. makes it "one of a kind", particularly in the creation of the C-SPAN Video Library, which received significant press coverage.
Despite its stated commitment to providing politically balanced programming, C-SPAN and its shows such as "Washington Journal", "Booknotes", "Q & A", and "After Words" have been accused by some liberal organizations of having a conservative bias. In 2005, the media criticism organization Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting (FAIR) released a study of C-SPAN's morning telephone call-in show "Washington Journal", showing that Republicans were favored as guests over Democrats by a two-to-one margin during a six-month period that year, and that people of color are underrepresented. A 2007 survey released by the Center for Economic and Policy Research reported that C-SPAN covered conservative think tanks more than left-of-center think tanks.
Must-carry.
In 1992, Congress passed must-carry regulations, which required cable carriers to allocate spectrum to local broadcasters. This affected the availability of C-SPAN in some areas, in particular C-SPAN2, as some providers chose to discontinue carriage of the channel altogether. Between 1993 and 1994, cable systems in 95 U.S. cities dropped or reduced broadcasts of C-SPAN and C-SPAN2, following the implementation of the must-carry regulations. Viewers protested these decisions, especially when the changes coincided with matters of local interest occurring in the House or Senate. Some communities, such as Eugene, Oregon and Alexandria, Virginia, were successful in restoring C-SPAN availability. C-SPAN availability was later restored as technological developments that resulted in the expansion of channel capacity on cable providers allowed for mandatory stations and the C-SPAN networks both to be broadcast.
Other services.
C-SPAN offers a number of public services related to the network's public affairs programming. C-SPAN Classroom, a free membership service for teachers, began in July 1987 and offers help using C-SPAN resources for classes or research. The C-SPAN School Bus, introduced In November 1993, traveled around the U.S. educating the public about government and politics using C-SPAN resources, and served as a mobile television studio. The bus also recorded video footage of the places that it visited. A second bus was introduced in 1996. The two original buses were retired in 2010, and the C-SPAN Digital Bus was inaugurated, introducing the public to C-SPAN's enhanced digital products. C-SPAN has also equipped six Local Content Vehicles (LCVs) to travel the country and record unique political and historical stories, with each vehicle containing production and web-based technologies to produce on-the-spot content.
C-SPAN has published ten books based on its programming; these contain original material and text taken from interview transcripts. The first C-SPAN book, "C-SPAN: America's Town Hall", was published in 1988. Other C-SPAN books include: "Gavel to Gavel: A C-SPAN Guide to Congress"; "Who's Buried in Grant's Tomb?", a guide to the grave sites of U.S. presidents; "Abraham Lincoln - Great American Historians On Our Sixteenth President", a collection of essays based on C-SPAN interviews with American historians; and "The Supreme Court", which features biographies and interviews with past Supreme Court judges together with commentary from legal experts. Five books have been drawn from the former "Booknotes" program: "Booknotes: Life Stories"; "Booknotes: On American Character"; "Booknotes: Stories from American History"; "Booknotes: America's Finest Authors on Reading, Writing and the Power of Ideas", the latter a compilation of short monologues taken from the transcripts of Lamb's interviews; and a companion book to the series on Tocqueville, "Traveling Tocqueville's America: A Tour Book".

</doc>
<doc id="77802" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77802" title="Orestes">
Orestes

In Greek mythology, Orestes (; ) was the son of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon. He is the subject of several Ancient Greek plays and of various myths connected with his madness and purification, which retain obscure threads of much older ones.
Greek literature.
Homer.
In the Homeric telling of the story, Orestes is a member of the doomed house of Atreus which is descended from Tantalus and Niobe. Orestes is absent from Mycenae when his father, Agamemnon, returns from the Trojan War with the Trojan princess Cassandra as his concubine, and thus not present for Agamemnon's murder by his wife Clytemnestra's lover, Aegisthus. Seven years later, Orestes returns from Athens and avenges his father's death by slaying both Aegisthus and his own mother Clytemnestra.
In the "Odyssey", Orestes is held up as a favorable example to Telemachus, whose mother Penelope is plagued by suitors.
Pindar.
According to Pindar, the young Orestes was saved by his nurse Arsinoe (Laodamia) or his sister Electra, who conveyed him out of the country when Clytemnestra wished to kill him. In the familiar theme of the hero's early eclipse and exile, he escaped to Phanote on Mount Parnassus, where King Strophius took charge of him. In his twentieth year, he was urged by Electra to return home and avenge his father's death. He returned home along with his friend Pylades, Strophius's son.
Sophocles and Euripides.
The same myth is told differently by Sophocles and Euripides in their "Electra" plays.
Robert Graves.
In "The Greek Myths" the mythographer and poet, Robert Graves, translates and interprets the legends and myth fragments about Clytemnestra, Agamemnon, and Orestes, as suggesting a ritual killing of a ""king"" (Agamemnon) in very early religious ceremonies that were suppressed when patriarchy replaced the matriarchies of very ancient Greece. Graves asserts that the sacrilege for which the Erinyes pursued Orestes was actually the killing of his mother, who represented matriarchy. He explains that worship of Athena was retained as a cult because it was too strong to be suppressed, but she was "recast" as a child of Zeus in new myths, even given the previously incomprehensible role of justifying what would have been a horrific crime against the old religious customs. Graves, and many other mythographers, were influenced by "The Golden Bough" of James Frazer, and since it was published many myths have been reinterpreted to reveal clues to ancient religious practices that were kept as secret rituals.
Greek drama.
The story of Orestes was the subject of the "Oresteia" of Aeschylus ("Agamemnon", "Choephori", "Eumenides"), of the "Electra" of Sophocles, and of the "Electra", "Iphigeneia in Tauris", "Iphigenia at Aulis" (in which he appears as an infant carried by Clytemnestra) and "Orestes", all of Euripides.
Aeschylus.
In Aeschylus's "Eumenides", Orestes goes mad after the deed and is pursued by the Erinyes, whose duty it is to punish any violation of the ties of family piety. He takes refuge in the temple at Delphi; but, even though Apollo had ordered him to do the deed, he is powerless to protect Orestes from the consequences. At last Athena receives him on the acropolis of Athens and arranges a formal trial of the case before twelve judges, including herself. The Erinyes demand their victim; he pleads the orders of Apollo. Athena votes last announcing that she is for acquittal; then the votes are counted and the result is a tie, resulting in an acquittal according to the rules previously stipulated by Athena. The Erinyes are propitiated by a new ritual, in which they are worshipped as "Semnai Theai", "Venerable Ones", and Orestes dedicates an altar to "Athena Areia".
Euripides.
As Aeschylus tells it, the punishment ended there, but according to Euripides, in order to escape the persecutions of the Erinyes, Orestes was ordered by Apollo to go to Tauris, carry off the statue of Artemis which had fallen from heaven, and to bring it to Athens. He went to Tauris with Pylades, and the pair were at once imprisoned by the people, among whom the custom was to sacrifice all Greek strangers to Artemis. The priestess of Artemis, whose duty it was to perform the sacrifice, was Orestes' sister Iphigenia. She offered to release him if he would carry home a letter from her to Greece; he refused to go, but bids Pylades to take the letter while he stays to be slain. After a conflict of mutual affection, Pylades at last yielded, but the letter brought about the recognition of brother and sister, and all three escaped together, carrying with them the image of Artemis.
Other literature and media.
After his return to Greece, Orestes took possession of his father's kingdom of Mycenae (killing Aegisthus' son, Alete) to which were added Argos and Laconia. He was said to have died of a snakebite in Arcadia. His body was conveyed to Sparta for burial (where he was the object of a cult) or, according to a Roman legend, to Aricia, when it was removed to Rome (Servius on Aeneid, ii. 116).
Before the Trojan War, Orestes was to marry his cousin Hermione, daughter of Menelaus and Helen. Things soon changed after Orestes committed matricide: Menelaus then gave his daughter to Neoptolemus, son of Achilles and Deidamia. According to Euripides' play Andromache, Orestes slew Neoptolemus just outside a temple and took off with Hermione. He seized Argos and Arcadia after their thrones had become vacant, becoming ruler of all the Peloponnesus. His son by Hermione, Tisamenus, became ruler after him but was eventually killed by the Heracleidae.
There is extant a Latin epic poem, consisting of about 1000 hexameters, called "Orestes Tragoedia", which has been ascribed to Dracontius of Carthage.
Orestes appears also to be a dramatic prototype for all persons whose crime is mitigated by extenuating circumstances. These legends belong to an age when higher ideas of law and of social duty were being established; the implacable blood-feud of primitive society gives place to a fair trial, and in Athens, when the votes of the judges are evenly divided, mercy prevails.
In one version of the story of Telephus, the infant Orestes was kidnapped by King Telephus, who used him as leverage in his demand that Achilles heal him.
According to some sources, Orestes fathered Penthilus by his half-sister, Erigone.
In "The History" by Herodotus, the Oracle of Delphi foretold that the Spartans could not defeat the Tegeans until they moved the bones of Orestes to Sparta. Lichas discovered the body, which measured 7 cubits long (around 10 feet, or 3.30 meters). Thus Orestes would have been a Giant.
For modern treatments see the Oresteia in the arts and popular culture.
Orestes and Pylades.
The intense relationship between Orestes and Pylades was presented by some Greek writers as romantic or homoerotic. A dialogue entitled Erotes ("Affairs of the Heart") and attributed to Lucian compares the merits and advantages of heterosexuality and homoeroticism, and Orestes and Pylades are presented as the principal representatives of homoerotic friendship:
""Taking the love god as the mediator of their emotions for each other, they sailed together as it were on the same vessel of life...nor did they restrict their affectionate friendship to the limits of Hellas...as soon as they set foot on the land of the Tauride, the Fury of matricides was there to welcome the strangers, and, when the natives stood around them, the one was struck to the ground by his usual madness and lay there, but Pylades 'did wipe away the foam and tend his frame and shelter him with a fine well-woven robe,' thus showing the feelings not merely of a lover, but also of a father. But when it had been decided that, while one remained to be killed, the other should depart for Mycenae to bear a letter, each wished to remain for the sake of the other, considering that he himself lived in the survival of his friend. But Orestes refused to take the letter, claiming Pylades was the fitter person to do so, and thus showed himself almost to be the lover rather than the beloved.""
The wider context of these remarks, describing the physical intimacy open to male pairs, indicates that the love exemplified by Orestes and Pylades would not necessarily have excluded even more overt homoerotic or homosexual elements. In 1734, George Frederic Handel's opera "L'Oreste" (based on Giangualberto Barlocci’s Roman libretto of 1723), was premiered in London's Covent Garden. The fame of Lucian's works in the 18th century, as well as the generally well-known tradition of Greco-Roman heroic homoeroticism, made it natural for theatre audiences of that period to have recognized an intense, romantic, if not positively homoerotic quality, to the relationship between Orestes and Pylades.

</doc>
<doc id="77804" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77804" title="El Carmel">
El Carmel

El Carmel (), or simply Carmel, is a neighbourhood in the district of Horta-Guinardó, in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Carmel is in the municipal district of Horta-Guinardó. The area was developed mainly in the 1960s and 1970s when immigrant workers, encouraged to move to Barcelona by the government of the dictator Francisco Franco built housing for themselves. The combination of houses, then isolated on the rural hillside of what is now Parc dels Tres Turons ("Three Hills Park"), ad-hoc buildings put up without building permits and more planned urban development has given the area its modern appearance of many buildings piled on the hillside.
Carmel became infamous in 2005 when there was a major tunnel construction accident. It brought to a halt the expansion works on line 5 of the Barcelona Metro and led to the evacuation of dozens of buildings in the area. Local residents protested and most of those evacuated to other areas have finally been rehoused and a new school opened. The Barcelona City Council has pledged more investment in the area to improve transport, accessibility and services.

</doc>
<doc id="77807" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77807" title="Discovery Channel">
Discovery Channel

Discovery Channel (formerly The Discovery Channel from 1985 to 1995, and often referred to as simply "Discovery") is an American basic cable and satellite television channel (which is also delivered via IPTV, terrestrial television and internet television in other parts of the world) that is the flagship television property of Discovery Communications, a publicly traded company run by CEO David Zaslav. , Discovery Channel is the third most widely distributed cable channel in the United States, behind TBS and The Weather Channel; it is available in 409 million households worldwide, through its U.S. flagship channel and its various owned or licensed television channels internationally.
It initially provided documentary television programming focused primarily on popular science, technology, and history, but in recent years has expanded into reality television and pseudo-scientific entertainment. Programming on the flagship Discovery Channel in the U.S. is primarily focused on reality television series, such as speculative investigation (with shows such as "MythBusters", "Unsolved History", and "Best Evidence"), automobiles, and occupations (such as "Dirty Jobs" and "Deadliest Catch"); it also features documentaries specifically aimed at families and younger audiences.
A popular annual feature on the channel is Shark Week, which airs on Discovery during the summer months.
, Discovery Channel is available to approximately 96,589,000 pay television households (83% of households with television) in the United States.
History.
John Hendricks founded the channel and its parent company, Cable Educational Network Inc., in 1982. Several investors (including the BBC, Allen & Company and Venture America) raised $5 million in start-up capital to launch the network.
The Discovery Channel began broadcasting on June 17, 1985. It was initially available to 156,000 households and broadcast for 12 hours each day between 3 p.m. and 3 a.m. About 75 percent of its program content had never been broadcast on U.S. television before. In its early years, the channel's focus centered on educational programming in the form of cultural and wildlife documentaries, and science and historical specials. It also broadcast some Soviet programming during this time, including the news program "Vremya". In 1988, the channel premiered the nightly program "World Monitor" (produced by "The Christian Science Monitor"). In 1988, The Discovery Channel debuted an annual programming stunt called Shark Week, the week-long event eventually gained in popularity starting in the 1990s and continues to be shown each summer on the channel to this day. By 1990, the channel was available in over 50 million households. 
The channel began to shift its focus in the early 2000s to attract a broader audience, by incorporating more reality-based series focusing on automotive, occupations, and speculative investigation series; though the refocused programming strategy proved popular, Discovery Channel's ratings began to decline by the middle of the decade. The drop in viewership was widely attributed to an over-reliance on a few hit series, such as "Monster Garage" and "American Chopper". Some critics The network's ratings eventually recovered in 2006.
On January 4, 2006, Discovery Communications announced anchor Ted Koppel, executive producer Tom Bettag and eight other former staff members from the ABC newsmagazine "Nightline" were joining Discovery Channel. The network was nominated for seven Primetime Emmy Awards that year for shows including "The Flight that Fought Back" (a documentary about the hijacking of United Airlines Flight 93 during the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001) and "Deadliest Catch" (a reality series about a group of seafood fishermen).
In 2007, Discovery Channel's top series included the Emmy Award- and Peabody Award-winning "Planet Earth", "Dirty Jobs", "MythBusters", and "Deadliest Catch". Discovery Channel's 2008 lineup included "Fight Quest" and "Smash Lab".
On September 1, 2010, 43-year-old James Jay Lee entered the Discovery Communications headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland, armed with a handgun. Lee fired at least one shot and held several employees hostage; he was later shot dead by police. Lee had published criticisms of the network at Savetheplanetprotest.com.
In December 2015, Discovery Communications launched its TV Everywhere service, Discovery Go, which features live and video-on-demand content from Discovery Channel and eight of its sister networks.
Programming.
Popular programs on the channel have included the Shark Week programming event, "Deadliest Catch", "MythBusters", "How It's Made", "Dirty Jobs", "Cash Cab", and "Man vs. Wild". Christopher Lowell won a Daytime Emmy Award in 2000 for "The Christopher Lowell Show" (which aired on the Discovery Channel from 1998 to 2001).
Non-television ventures.
Pro Cycling Team.
Shortly before the 2004 Tour de France, Discovery Channel announced it would become the primary sponsor of a professional bicycling team starting in 2005, featuring seven-time Tour de France winner Lance Armstrong. After the 2007 victory with the Spaniard Alberto Contador, Discovery Channel discontinued the cycling sponsorship.
Discovery Channel Radio.
Discovery Channel Radio was a radio network, whose programming consisted of audio versions of popular programs from the Discovery Communications family of television channels. Discovery Channel Radio was previously carried by XM Satellite Radio, until its removal from the provider in early September 2005. Sirius Satellite Radio dropped Discovery Radio from its lineup on February 21, 2007; it was also carried on both of Canada's major satellite radio services.
Store.
Discovery Channel lent its brand to retail stores in malls and other locations across America, and to an online store. The store's specialty products were educational gifts, most of which were manufactured with the Discovery Channel brand name. On May 17, 2007, Discovery Communications announced it would close its standalone and mall-based stores. Hudson Group will continue to operate the Discovery Channel Airport Stores, and the website remains in operation.
Telescope.
Discovery Channel funded the construction of the Discovery Channel Telescope, in partnership with Lowell Observatory.
Website.
Discovery.com is the Discovery Channel's official website, which primarily provides information on the channel's programming and additional content, including games, tied to those shows.
Marketing and branding.
Taglines.
Discovery Channel's previous taglines had been "Explore Your World" and "There's No Thrill Like Discovery." Keeping with its changing focus away from strictly educational programming toward reality TV, the slogan was changed in the early 2000s to "Entertain Your Brain". The new tagline for the revamped Discovery Channel was "Let's All Discover...", with a continuing phrase or sentence that relates to a show. For example, when advertising for "MythBusters", the commercial would end, "Let's All Discover, Why No Myth Is Safe". With the 2008 logo change came a new tagline: "The World is Just...Awesome." The newest image promos include an unreleased mix of the song "Wonders Never Cease" by Morcheeba, from the album entitled "The Antidote" and the song "Typical" by Mutemath. Their most recent promo "I Love the World", created by the 72andSunny agency, contains amended verses and the refrain from the traditional campfire song "I Love The Mountains".
Logos.
The Discovery Channel's first logo was a television screen picturing a map of the world. For two decades, starting in 1987, the channel's logo incorporated the Discovery wordmark rendered in the Aurora Bold Condensed font with a circlular shape in front of it. The circle usually took the form of a rising sun, or an animated version of the Vitruvian Man.
In 1995, the channel's name was simplified to "Discovery Channel", dropping the "The" from its name. A globe became a permanent part of the logo, and an underline was added to the bottom of the logo. During this time, the company started expanding and launched several new networks. Many of the sister networks used logo designs similar to the one used by Discovery, often incorporating the globe and using the same typeface. Networks that had logos based on Discovery's included Animal Planet, Travel Channel, Discovery Science, Discovery Wings and Discovery Home & Leisure. The logo was changed slightly in 2000 when the word "Channel" was moved into the underline, and the globe was altered to focus on the Pacific Ocean.
On April 15, 2008, before the season premiere of "Deadliest Catch", Discovery Channel debuted a new logo, and a new tagline ("The World is Just Awesome"). The logo was designed by Boston-based design firm Viewpoint Creative and replaced the longstanding Aurora Bold Condensed font in the logo with Gotham. The globe has been merged with the "D" in "Discovery". A combination of the "D" in the wordmark and the globe is sometimes used separately, primarily as the channel's logo bug during its programming. Later in 2009, design agency Royale slightly modified the logo, detaching the globe from the "D", and making the word "CHANNEL" slightly bigger. The modified logo was rolled out to Discovery's international channels during the first half of 2009.
International.
Discovery Channel reaches 431 million homes in 170 countries. Discovery Communications currently offers 29 network brands in 33 languages. In a number of countries, Discovery's channels are available on digital satellite platforms with multiple language soundtracks or subtitles including Spanish, German, Russian, Czech, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Bengali, Dutch, Portuguese, Italian, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, Finnish, Turkish, Greek, Polish, Hungarian, Romanian, Arabic, Slovene, Japanese, Korean and Serbian. In Bulgaria, Discovery has, since 2000–2001, displayed Bulgarian subtitles by all cable providers and since 2010 – with Bulgarian dubbling for some shows.
Canada.
Discovery Channel Canada has an ownership structure different from Discovery Channel. Canadian viewers receive almost identical English-language programming to the channel that American viewers watch, but with added Canadian content to meet Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission requirements. Most notably, the Canadian channel carries the daily science news show "Daily Planet", originally "@discovery.ca", the first of its kind. Occasionally, several segments on similar topics are taken from various episodes and put together into one-hour specials that are broadcast on the original Discovery Channel. Through a brand licensing agreement with Bell Media, Discovery Channel Canada also operates Canadian versions of Discovery World HD, Discovery Health, Discovery Science, Investigation Discovery and Animal Planet.
Europe.
In the United Kingdom, Discovery Channel UK airs some common programs as the U.S. version, including "MythBusters", "American Chopper", "How It's Made" and "Deadliest Catch". The channel is carried as a basic subscription channel on the SKYdigital satellite service and digital cable provider Virgin Media. Discovery UK also operates Discovery HD, Discovery Knowledge, Discovery Turbo, Discovery Science, Animal Planet, DMAX, Discovery Real Time, Discovery Home & Health, Discovery Travel & Leisure and Discovery Shed. Many of these channels also have timeshifted versions. In the Republic of Ireland, the UK version of Discovery Channel is available on most cable providers in that country, but with local advertisements.
In Germany, Austria and Switzerland, Discovery Channel is part of the Premiere digital network and supplies specific programs to other networks like ZDF and kabel eins. Discovery Communications is also owner of the documentary-channel XXP. The channel was bought in the spring of 2006 from its former shareholders Spiegel TV and "dctp". All programs are dubbed into German. The channel is now known as "DMAX", presumably to associate the channel with Discovery.
In the Netherlands, the Discovery Channel is included on most cable, IPTV and DVB-T providers. Nearly all of the programs are broadcast in their original language, but they are subtitled in Dutch as is the policy of all Dutch television stations. Some programs and most promotions and program announcements have a Dutch voice-over. In Flanders, the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium, a Flemish Discovery Channel launched (previously the Dutch version was available for IPTV, DVB-C and DVB-S) on cable (and digital) television on October 1, 2009.
In Italy, the Discovery Channel (and HD) is distributed via satellite by Sky Italia as part of the documentary pack. In addition, Italy has four Discovery-branded channels: Discovery Science, Discovery Real Time, Discovery Animal Planet and Discovery Travel and Living.
In Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Serbia and Slovenia, Discovery Channel is carried by most cable television and IPTV providers with all the content subtitled in the respective languages. Additionally, it is also available on digital satellite platforms in Czech Republic, Poland and Slovakia (sometimes requiring an additional fee). In Poland, Cyfra Plus broadcasts the programs dubbed in Polish and in original English. An additional channel, Discovery Historia, owned in cooperation with Polish broadcaster TVN, is carried on the "n" digital platform.
In Spain, the channel shares a schedule and programs with Portugal and is available on most satellite and cable platforms, making it possible to broadcast both in Spanish and Portuguese. In Spain, all programs are dubbed; whereas in Portugal, most of them are subtitled. In addition, Portugal has three Discovery-branded channels: Discovery Turbo (focusing on motorsports), Discovery Science (focusing on science and technology) and Discovery Civilization (focusing on historical events). These channels follow the same model as the original Discovery Channel, except for the absence of advertising. Spanish advertisements are broadcast on the Portuguese feed, non-subtitled or dubbed.
Australia and New Zealand.
In Australia, the Discovery Channel is part of a six-channel package (not including timeshifts) on digital subscription television, available on Foxtel, Optus TV and AUSTAR.
In New Zealand, the Australian version of Discovery is broadcast on SKY Network Television.
Southeast Asia.
In India, China, Japan, South Korea, Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam and the rest of South East Asia, the South East Asian version of the Discovery Channel is available on digital subscription television. Discovery Channel Asia still shows crime programs (such as "Most Evil" and "The FBI Files"). Many programs feature development and society in Asian countries, especially in India and China. Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore have other channels branched from the main Discovery Channel, including Discovery Turbo, Discovery Science, Discovery Home & Health and Discovery Travel & Living.
The Philippines has its own version of the main Discovery Channel. Its feed shares the program schedule as the South East Asia feed, except for the inclusion of the Philippine advertisements during commercial breaks.
India.
Discovery India provides audio feed in 3 Indian languages Hindi, Telugu and Bengali along with English and a dedicated channel in Tamil. 
Hindi.
Discovery Channel started offering Hindi audio feed in 1998.
Telugu.
Discovery Channel offers its programs in Telugu version in 24-hour format from 21 October 2010 by all cable and dth services in HD and MPEG formats 
Bangla.
Discovery Channel started offering its programs in Bangla version in 24-hour format from 2011 by all cable and dth services in HD and MPEG formats 
Tamil.
On August 15, 2011, Discovery launched a Tamil version of the channel. In July 2012, it began to be carried by Dish TV. At that time, the channel reached over 10 million households in Tamil Nadu, India via analog transmission. All the programmes are dubbed in Tamil and it has been receiving tremendous responses.
South Africa.
In South Africa, Discovery Channel shares a schedule and programming with all of Africa, the Middle East and Turkey. Discovery Channel and sibling channels Discovery World, TLC, Investigation Discovery and Animal Planet are available on the DStv/Multichoice platform.
Controversies.
RFID.
In August 2008, it was reported by "The Consumerist" that Discovery Channel had preempted an episode of "MythBusters" examining RFID security in regard to its implementation in credit cards before its original broadcast because the episode would upset credit card companies, who are major advertisers on Discovery Channel. It was later determined that the decision not to investigate the issue was made by Beyond Productions, the "MythBusters" production company, and was not made by Discovery Channel or their advertising department.
Enigmatic Malaysia.
An ad promoting "Enigmatic Malaysia", a special series on the network meant to highlight the cultural heritages of Malaysia, mistakenly featured Balinese Pendet dancers. This prompted outrage from Balinese dancers, who posted messages demanding that Malaysia apologize over the misinformation, which then sparked a series of street protests. Further demands were made from the local governments, cultural historians and the tourism ministry in Indonesia for Malaysia to clarify the situation. The Malaysian government reportedly offered an apology, which was rejected by the Indonesian tourism minister, since the apology was given informally by phone, the Indonesian tourism minister demanded a written apology to make it more accountable.
Romanian RCS&RDS.
In November 2012, the Romanian RCS&RDS, the largest company of its kind on the internal market, interrupted its carriage of Discovery Communications channels, including Discovery Channel. The CEO of Discovery Communications Mark Hollinger sent an open letter in his attempt to counteract the action of RCS&RDS, attracting the attention to the negation of the alleged right of the viewer to choose the viewed channels. In turn, RCS&RDS issued a press statement accusing of hypocrisy Hollinger's discourse attentive at the needs of viewers and attracted attention to the fact that, during negotiations, the main preoccupations of the Discovery representatives was maintaining as high as possible tariffs and monetary gains”.
Giant Sharks.
In August 2013 Discovery Channel released a film purporting to be a factual documentary entitled "", which claimed to show that Carcharadon megalodon (a giant shark species that has been extinct for millions of years) still exists. George Monbiot has claimed that the images used in this documentary, specifically of a megalodon in an image of Nazi U-boats off the coast of South Africa in 1942 was faked. The image appears to have been taken from film footage but no shark can be seen in this film. George Monbiot confronted the production company, Pilgrim Studios about this image and other controversial statements in the film, but had received no reply as of 21 February 2014. The airing of this program fueled an uproar by viewers and by the science and science-loving community. It eventually started a Discovery Channel boycott. Since then Discovery has increasingly come under fire for using junk science, pushing dubious theories, creating fake stories and misleading scientists as to the nature of the documentary being produced.
Concerns have been raised about the implications of this film considering recent calls for shark culls in Australia.
Eaten Alive.
"Eaten Alive" was a television program in which wildlife filmmaker Paul Rosolie was purportedly going to be "eaten alive" by an anaconda. It aired on December 7, 2014. When the special aired, the anaconda attacked Rosolie but did not swallow him, as its title had implied, prompting numerous complaints of a bait and switch.
Naked and Afraid.
"Naked and Afraid" is an active series that first premiered on June 23, 2013. One man and one woman are thrown alone into the wild with nothing and left to survive. Though the show blurs some of the bodies of the actors, they are fully naked which sparked a controversy and received critical reception. Focus on the Family's PluggedIn gave it a critical review. Parents Television Council, One Million Moms, and American Family Association have boycotted the network.

</doc>
<doc id="77808" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77808" title="Disney Channel">
Disney Channel

Disney Channel (originally The Disney Channel from 1983 to 1997) is an American basic cable and satellite television network that serves as the flagship property of owner Disney Channels Worldwide, a unit of the Disney–ABC Television Group, itself a unit of the Disney Media Networks division of The Walt Disney Company.
The channel's programming consists of original first-run television series, theatrically-released and original made-for-cable movies and select other third-party programming. Disney Channel – which formerly operated as a premium service – originally marketed its programs towards families, and then at younger children by the late 1990s. Most of its original programming is aimed at female children ages 6-11, while its Disney Junior programs are targeted at younger children ages 2–7.
As of February 2015, Disney Channel is available to approximately 96.2 million pay television households (82.7% of households with at least one television set) in the United States.
History.
1977–83: Conception.
In early 1977, Walt Disney Productions executive Jim Jimirro brought forth the idea of a cable television network that would feature television and film material from the studio. Since the company was focusing on the development of the Epcot Center at Walt Disney World, Disney chairman Card Walker turned down the proposal. Disney revived the idea in 1982, entering into a partnership with the satellite unit of Group W (which had sold its 50% ownership stake in one of The Disney Channel's early rivals, Showtime, to Viacom around the same time); however, Group W would ultimately drop out of the intended joint venture that September, due to disagreements over the channel's creative control and financial obligations that would have required Group W to pay a 50% share of the channel's start-up costs.
Despite losing Group W as a partner, The Disney Channel continued on with its development – now solely under the oversight of Walt Disney Productions, and under the leadership of the channel's first president Alan Wagner; Walt Disney Productions formally announced the launch of its family-oriented cable channel in early 1983. Disney later invested US$11 million to acquiring space on two transponders of the Hughes Communications satellite Galaxy 1, and spent US$20 million on purchasing and developing programming. The concept of a premium service aimed at a family audience – which Walt Disney Productions would choose to develop The Disney Channel as – had first been attempted by HBO, which launched Take 2 in 1979 (the service, which was HBO's first attempt at a spin-off niche service (predating Cinemax's launch in August 1980), would shut down after only a few months on the air), and was followed by the 1981 launch of the Group W-owned Home Theater Network (which was the only premium channel that strictly competed with The Disney Channel for that demographic for much of the 1980s, until the 1987 launch of Festival).
1983–90: Launch and early years as a premium channel.
The Disney Channel launched nationally as a premium channel on April 18, 1983 at 7:00 a.m. Eastern Time. The first program ever aired on the channel was also its first original series, "Good Morning, Mickey!", which showcased classic Disney animated shorts. At the time of its launch, The Disney Channel's programming aired for 16 hours each day, from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time (comparatively, its competitors HBO, Cinemax, Showtime, The Movie Channel and Spotlight all had been operating on 24-hour programming schedules for a few years at the time). By the fall of 1983, the channel was available to more than 532,000 subscribers in the United States; this total would increase to 611,000 subscribers in December of that year.
Programming during the channel's run as a premium service – carrying through to its transition to a basic cable channel – targeted children and teenagers during the morning and afternoon, families during primetime, and adults at night. The Disney Channel differed from other premium services in that it not only acquired broadcast rights to theatrical feature films, but, in addition to producing its own original programs, the channel aired several television series that were acquired through corporate sister Buena Vista Television and other program distributors. In its first years, the Disney Channel's programming included original series such as "Welcome to Pooh Corner" and "You and Me Kid", along with several foreign-imported animated series and movies including "Asterix", "The Raccoons", "Paddington Bear" and the Australian western "Five Mile Creek". The original late night schedule featured movies and reruns of "The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet".
The channel's daytime schedule during its existence as a pay service was populated primarily by series aimed at children (as opposed to the movie-driven daytime lineups of other premium services), interspersed with a limited number of movies – usually a single daytime feature on weekdays, and two or three films on weekends, along with occasional live-action and animated specials for children. The nighttime schedule featured a mix of theatrical, made-for-cable and straight-to-video films (recent and older family-oriented movies were shown in the early evenings, while classic films – mainly releases from the 1930s to the 1960s – usually ran during the late evening and overnight hours) and original specials (primarily in the form of concerts, variety specials and documentaries). "D-TV", a short segment featuring popular music interwoven with scenes from Disney's animated shorts and feature films, also periodically aired as filler between shows. Unlike other premium services, The Disney Channel opted not to disclose a film's Motion Picture Association of America-assigned rating prior to the start of the feature (the only bumpers appearing at the start of programs indicated closed captioned programs, as well as on rare occasions, parental advisories for feature films).
The channel's primary logo (which was used until 1997, although it began to be used on-air less frequently beginning in September 1995) featured multiple lines resembling a television screen that featured a negative space silhouette of Mickey Mouse's head; IDs shown before programs between 1986 and 1997 generally involved Mickey – whose arms are only shown – being involved in various situations (such as him having a nightmare in which the "Mickey Mouse TV" logo chases and then engulfs one of his gloves, Mickey wiping a foggy window or Mickey making shadow figures on a flashlight-lit wall) that featured the logo being formed or displayed in various ways.
For its subscribers, the channel provided a monthly (and later bi-monthly) program guide/magazine called "The Disney Channel Magazine", which in addition to carrying listings for the channel's programming, had also carried feature stories on upcoming programs (the magazine also lent its name to a series of interstitials seen during promotional breaks on the channel that provided behind-the-scenes looks at The Disney Channel's programming). "The Disney Channel Magazine" ceased publication in early 1997 and was replaced by "Behind the Ears" (a print magazine which also shared its name with another series of behind-the-scenes interstitials that aired on the channel from 1997 to 2000) as the channel began primarily operating as a commercial-free basic channel.
Besides "The Disney Channel Magazine" and "DTV", interstitial segments that padded out extended promotional breaks between programs (usually those seen within its nighttime schedule) during this period included "A Disney Moment" (featuring clips from Disney feature films and animated shorts); "Backstage Pass" (behind-the-scenes segments profiling upcoming Disney film and television projects); "Dateline Disney" (a generalized segment focusing on Disney's various filmed and themed entertainment projects; "Dateline Walt Disney World" and "Dateline Disneyland" were offshoots that aired from the late 1980s to mid-1990s which focused on attractions at the Disney theme parks); "Walt Disney Imagineering" (focusing on Disney projects from animation to attractions at the Disney theme parks); and "Discover Magazine" (an informative science and technology segment that was produced in conjunction with the magazine of the same name).
As a premium channel, The Disney Channel often ran free previews of five days to one week in length four times annually, as well as two periodic weekend-only previews (with ads targeted to cable and satellite customers who were not subscribers to the channel); this resulted in The Disney Channel offering more preview events each calendar year during its tenure as a pay service than HBO, Cinemax and Showtime had run during that timeframe. In April 1984, the channel extended its daily programming to 18 hours (from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific Time), with the addition of two hours onto its late night schedule. On December 1, 1986, The Disney Channel began broadcasting 24 hours a day.
By September 1983, The Disney Channel was available on cable providers in all 50 U.S. states. In October 1983, the channel debuted its first made-for-cable movie, "Tiger Town", which earned the channel a CableACE Award. The first classic Disney animated film to be broadcast on the channel, "Alice in Wonderland", premiered on the network in January 1984. By January 1985, the channel's programming reached 1.75 million subscribers, at which time the channel had reached profitability.
Early in 1986, the musical sitcom "Kids Incorporated" premiered on the channel; the series was centered around a pre-teen (and later teen-to-young adult) group of friends who formed a pop music group, mixing their everyday situations with variety show and music video-style performances. Incorporating popular and recent songs that were performed by the cast (some of which had certain lyrics toned down to be more age-appropriate), it became a hit for The Disney Channel, spawning many future stars in both the music and acting worlds during its nine-year run, including Martika (who went by her real name, Marta Marrero, during the show's first season); eventual "Party of Five" co-stars Scott Wolf and Jennifer Love Hewitt (billed as Love Hewitt); and Stacy Ferguson (later a member of The Black Eyed Peas as well as a solo artist, under the stage name "Fergie").
In May 1988, The Disney Channel began scrambling its signal to prevent unauthorized viewing by home satellite dish users that did not subscribe to the service. That August, the channel debuted a series of concert specials, titled "Going Home", with the first such special featuring Ashford & Simpson. That same year, "Good Morning, Miss Bliss", a starring vehicle for Hayley Mills (of "Polyanna" and "The Parent Trap" fame), made its debut. Following its cancellation by The Disney Channel after 13 episodes due to low ratings, the series was picked up by NBC in 1989, and retooled as "Saved by the Bell", with Mark-Paul Gosselaar, Dustin Diamond, Lark Voorhies and Dennis Haskins being the only cast members from "Miss Bliss" that were carried over to the new show; the retooled series became a hit as part of NBC's Saturday morning lineup (producing in the process) and through worldwide syndication.
In April 1989, the channel revived one of Disney's early television staples with "The All-New Mickey Mouse Club" (later known as simply "MMC"); it became an immediate hit that proved Disney's basic variety show formula still worked in the modern era (unlike the short-lived 1970s revival). This version contained many elements featured in the original series from "theme days" to updated mouseketeer jackets, but the scripted and musical segments were more contemporary (featuring a broad mix of pop, rock and R&B artists in music performances, as well as sketches and serials such as "Emerald Cove" and "Teen Angel"). "MMC" served as the launching pad for several future stars such as Christina Aguilera, Britney Spears, Ryan Gosling, Keri Russell, JC Chasez and Justin Timberlake.
In August 1989, the channel launched a series of interstitial segments called "The Disney Channel Salutes The American Teacher"; the channel subsequently began telecasting the American Teacher Awards in November 1991. By January 1990, The Disney Channel had about five million subscribers nationwide. In May of that year, The Disney Channel won its first Daytime Emmy Awards for the original made-for-cable film "Looking for Miracles", the documentary "Calgary '88: 16 Days of Glory", and the special "A Conversation with... George Burns", as well as its first Peabody Award for the television film "Mother Goose Rock 'n' Rhyme".
1990–97: As a hybrid premium/basic channel.
On September 1, 1990, TCI's Montgomery, Alabama system became the first cable provider to carry the channel as a basic cable service. In 1991, eight additional cable providers volunteered to move the channel to their expanded basic cable tiers, with the first to make the transition (as a test run) being Jones Intercable's systems in Fort Myers and Broward County, Florida. Other cable providers eventually began moving the channel to their basic tiers, either experimentally or on a full-time basis. Even as major providers such as Cox Communications and Marcus Cable began offering The Disney Channel on their basic tiers, executives for The Walt Disney Company denied that the channel had plans to convert into an ad-supported basic service, stating that the move from premium to basic cable on some systems was part of a five-year "hybrid" strategy that allowed providers to offer the channel in either form.
In 1991, The Disney Channel tested a two-channel multiplex service on two cable systems. HBO, Cinemax and Showtime also launched their own multiplex services that same year, however The Disney Channel would not make its own multiplex service permanent, unlike the others. By 1992, a third of the channel's subscriber base were estimated by Nielsen Media Research to be adults that did not have children; and by 1995, its subscriber base expanded to 15 million cable homes, eight million of which paid an additional monthly fee to receive the channel.
In March 1992, the channel debuted the original children's program "Adventures in Wonderland", a contemporary live-action adaption of "Alice in Wonderland" (which, in turn, was based on the novel "Alice Through the Looking Glass"). In September 1992, the channel began carrying the "Disney's Young Musicians Symphony Orchestra" series of specials, which aired annually until 1998. In honor of its 10th anniversary, the channel embarked on a 14-city nationwide bus tour starting in April 1993. By January 1995, The Disney Channel was available to 12.6 million subscribers; the period from 1994 to 1995 saw the largest yearly subscriber increase with 4.87 million households with cable television adding the channel. In March 1995, the first international Disney Channel service was launched in Taiwan. That year, the documentary "Anne Frank Remembered" premiered on the channel; that film would earn an Academy Award for Best Documentary in 1996.
In 1996, veteran cable executive Anne Sweeney was appointed to oversee The Disney Channel as its president; that September as the launch of Disney Channel service in Southeast Asia, the channel began offering a film in primetime each night starting at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time, with the expansion of the Sunday "Magical World of Disney" film block to Monday through Saturday nights; the new primetime schedule launched in September with the pay cable premiere of "The Lion King".
1997–2002: Transition to basic cable.
On April 6, 1997, The Disney Channel underwent a significant rebranding, shortening its name to just "Disney Channel" – though the channel was typically referred to simply as "Disney" in on-air promotions and network identifications until September 2002 – and introducing a new logo designed by Lee Hunt Associates (a black Mickey ear-shaped TV set, though with the introduction of a new graphics package for on-air promotions and IDs during the channel's daytime and evening lineup in 2000, the TV's patterning often varied; early versions of the logo featured people and animated characters appearing within the TV set element of the logo such as a 1930s-era Mickey Mouse). The debut of its new on-air look coincided with the cable television premiere of "Pocahontas".
The channel continued to transition from a premium service into a basic cable channel around this time, albeit with a similar programming format to the one it carried as a full-fledged pay service. However, the channel began shifting its target audience more toward kids (but continued to cater to family audiences at night), as it decreased the amount of classic films it aired, and its music programming shifted focus towards the pre-teen and teenage demographic, incorporating music videos and revamping its concert specials to feature younger musicians popular with that demographic.
Disney Channel initially continued to offer free preview events for pay television providers that continued to carry it as a premium service, but discontinued them altogether within three years of the rebrand. Although many providers still required subscribers to pay an additional monthly fee to view the channel at the time of its decision to incorporate them, Disney Channel also began to air break interruptions within shows, featuring promotions for the channel's programs as well as for feature film and home video releases from Disney. By March 1998, the channel was available to 35 million cable subscribers.
The channel's programming would eventually be split into three distinct blocks: Playhouse Disney, Vault Disney, and Zoog Disney. Playhouse Disney debuted in May 1997, and comprised shows aimed at preschoolers. Its first series to reach wide popularity, "Bear in the Big Blue House", made its debut in October 1997 and was named by "TV Guide" as one of the "top 10 new shows for kids". Vault Disney debuted as a Sunday-only nighttime block in September 1997 and featured classic Disney programs such as "Zorro", "The Mickey Mouse Club" and the Walt Disney anthology television series, as well as older television specials and feature films).
Zoog Disney was introduced in August 1998, and was the most distinct of the three blocks, compromising Disney Channel Original Series aimed at preteens and teens. The afternoon-to-late evening lineup was hosted by anthropomorphic robot/alien hybrid characters called the "Zoogs" (who were originally two-dimensional figures, but were redesigned as cel shaded anime-esque figures and given mature voices in 2001) and was designed to encourage viewer interactivity between television and the Internet. The Zoog Disney brand would later expand, with most of the channel's weekend schedule (outside of Vault Disney and Playhouse Disney) becoming part of the "Zoog Weekendz" umbrella block from September 2001 to August 2002.
Original programming on Disney Channel began to ramp up during this period starting with the sitcom "Flash Forward", and would increase in the following years with shows like "The Famous Jett Jackson" in 1998 and "So Weird" in 1999, and into the early 2000s with "Lizzie McGuire" – whose star Hilary Duff became the first lead actor or actress in one of the channel's original series to cross over into music through a record deal with co-owned music label Hollywood Records – and "Even Stevens" – which helped launch the career of its star Shia LaBeouf.
In 1999, Disney Channel placed a mandate to cable operators that continued to carry it as a premium service to move the channel to a basic cable tier or stop carrying it altogether, stipulating that it would not renew carriage agreements with providers (such as Time Warner Cable and Comcast, the last major cable providers to carry the channel as a pay service) that chose to continue offering the network as a premium channel. With the shift towards children as its target audience, some of the off-network programs acquired by the channel during the early-mid 2000s (such as "Boy Meets World" and later "Sister, Sister") began to be edited for content such as profanity and sexual references that were deemed inappropriate for younger audiences.
By 2001, Disney Channel was available to approximately 70 million cable and satellite subscribers, largely consisting of those who had already received the channel through basic cable, as well as the remnants of its pay subscriber base. The music videos and concert specials that the channel had been airing since the 1997 rebrand were dropped by this time, citing the inability to obtain revenue from the artists' CD sales and lack of exclusivity for the videos; soon after, the channel began featuring music videos from artists signed to Disney's in-house record labels Hollywood Records and Walt Disney Records, and songs featured in Disney-produced feature films. In 2001, the channel debuted its first original animated series, "The Proud Family"; the following year, Disney Channel achieved its first major animated series hit with the premiere of "Kim Possible".
2002–07: Success and changing focus.
By 2002, Disney Channel was available in 80 million cable homes nationwide. In early September of that year, Disney Channel began a gradual rebranding, beginning with the discontinuance of the "Zoog" brand from on-air use (though Zoog Disney would continue to exist as a separate website until 2003, when the site's content was consolidated onto Disney Channel's primary website, DisneyChannel.com).
On September 9, the Vault Disney overnight block was replaced by same-day repeats of the channel's original and acquired programs, primarily to contribute to the network's then-upcoming "hip" image. The block's removal resulted in Disney Channel not featuring programs aimed at adults for the first time in its history – with the channel's primetime feature films becoming the only programs that intentionally targeted a broader family audience. , Disney Channel is the only major American cable channel aimed at children that does not directly maintain a dual audience of both kids and adults (Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network each feature nighttime programming for families and/or adults). Movies shown during primetime were also reduced from an average of two to three features to only one each night of the week. The channel phased out reality and scripted drama series from its original programming slate, while substantially increasing the channel's reliance on live-action sitcoms and animated series.
One month later on October 7, 2002, Disney Channel introduced a new on-air logo designed by CA Square (using an outline of Mickey Mouse's head as its centerpiece) that would later be adopted by its international sister channels in May 2003, and unveiled a new graphical design to fit the network's new look. Moreover, starting in May 2003, the channel began using a series of bumpers that are still used to this day, primarily featuring actors and animated characters from its original programs (and occasionally from Disney's theatrical releases) drawing the channel's logo using a wand (in actuality, a glowstick). Playhouse Disney became the only program block introduced in 1997 to remain on Disney Channel by this point (it was later relaunched as Disney Junior in February 2011). Around this time, Disney Channel's original series began airing as part of corporate sister ABC's Saturday morning children's program block; most of the shows that began airing on the block in 2005 would remain on the network until September 2011, when it was replaced by the Litton Entertainment-produced block Litton's Weekend Adventure.
Anne Sweeney was appointed president of Disney–ABC Television Group in 2004, ultimately helping to remake Disney Channel into "the major profit driver in the company" by the middle of the decade as the channel made major inroads in increasing its overall viewership, while in turn using a strategy – which proved successful – to discover, nurture and aggressively cross-promote teen music stars whose style and image were carefully targeted to the pre-teen and teenage demographic (a strategy that has been de-emphasized in the 2010s). Around that time – as Disney Channel's intended target audience began ranging from preschoolers to young adolescents – the channel began to add viewers outside this target demographic, creating increased competition with Viacom-owned Nickelodeon.
In 2003, Disney Channel premiered its first ever made-for-cable movie musical, "The Cheetah Girls", which received a worldwide audience of 84 million viewers. In 2005, "That's So Raven" (which debuted in January 2003) became the channel's highest-rated series since its transition to basic cable as well as becoming the first original series to run longer than 65 episodes – breaking a highly controversial rule that was implemented in 1998, aimed at limiting increases in production costs for its original programming (the 65-episode rule is no longer enforced, although most series are now usually discontinued after their fourth season at maximum) – "Raven" eventually became the channel's longest-running original series at 100 episodes and the first to spawn a spin-off series ("Cory in the House"). "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody" made its debut in March 2005, and also became a hit for the channel.
The earlier success of "The Cheetah Girls" led to the creation of other music-themed original programming: 2006 saw the debut of the hit original movie "High School Musical" (on January 20) and the series "Hannah Montana" (on March 25), the latter of which launched the career of its star Miley Cyrus (who starred opposite her father, country singer Billy Ray Cyrus, in the series). On July 28 of that year, the channel saw the debut of the its first multiple-series crossover, "That's So Suite Life of Hannah Montana" (which involved "That's So Raven", "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody" and "Hannah Montana").
2007–present: Modern Disney Channel.
In 2007, the channel began dropping most of its acquired programs, and also began to incorporate rotating hour-long blocks of its original series and other programs during the daytime hours. It also moved first-run episodes of its original series on weekends from late afternoon/early evening into primetime. In addition, the channel began putting less emphasis on its animated series, moving some of them from primetime to graveyard slots, while substantially increasing its reliance on teen-oriented sitcoms. Despite this, 2007 saw the debut of "Phineas and Ferb", the first original animated series (and first long-form original series) to be broadcast in HD.
Two other series premiered that year: the "That's So Raven" spin-off "Cory in the House" (which ended after two seasons) and the more successful "Wizards of Waverly Place" (which surpassed "That's So Raven" in October 2011 to become Disney Channel's longest-running original series, and ending its run in January 2012 at 106 episodes). "High School Musical 2" premiered on August 17 of that year, becoming the highest-rated non-sports program in the history of basic cable and the highest-rated made-for-cable movie premiere on record (as well as the highest-rated television program – broadcast or cable – of Summer 2007) with 17.2 million viewers.
In 2008, "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody" spin-off "The Suite Life on Deck" (which became the #1 series among children between ages of 6- and 12-years-old in 2008) premiered, along with two more music-based original made-for-TV movies: "Camp Rock" and "".
Capitalizing on the rising star status of the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato following "Camp Rock", two series respectively starring both acts premiered in 2009: "JONAS" and "Sonny with a Chance" (Lovato also co-starred in the original movie "Princess Protection Program", which premiered in June). The August debut of the original film "" became the highest-rated cable program of 2009 (excluding sporting events), premiering to 11.4 million viewers and ranking as the second highest-rated original movie premiere in Disney Channel's history, behind "High School Musical 2". The July 17 premiere of the "Wizards"/"Suite Life on Deck"/"Hannah Montana" crossover special "Wizards on Deck with Hannah Montana" also beat out its cable and broadcast competition that night with 9.1 million viewers (effectively making the "Wizards" and "On Deck" episodes featured in the special the highest-rated episodes of both series at that point).
In 2010, "Good Luck Charlie" debuted as Disney Channel's first original sitcom targeted at family audiences, while "Fish Hooks" and "Shake It Up" also made their debuts. That year also saw the premiere of ' among the four original movies premiering that year, along with two made-for-TV movies that were co-produced with Canadian specialty channels (', in conjunction with Movie Central and The Movie Network; and "16 Wishes", with Family Channel). On November 19, 2010, Disney Channel began offering an alternate Spanish-language audio feed (carried either as a separate second audio program track or sold by cable and satellite providers in the form of a separate channel that is part of a Spanish-language programming package). "Hannah Montana" and "The Suite Life on Deck" both ended in 2011; "Sonny with a Chance", meanwhile, was retooled as "So Random!" – focusing on the show within the show – after Demi Lovato decided not to return to the series to focus on her music career, following her treatment for bulimia and bipolar disorder (the "So Random!" spin-off series was canceled after one season in May 2012). Four other series ("A.N.T. Farm", "PrankStars", "Jessie" and "Austin & Ally") also debuted that year, along with six made for-TV movies (most notably "The Suite Life Movie", "Lemonade Mouth" and "").
In 2012, Disney Channel ended Nickelodeon's 17-year run as the highest-rated cable channel in the United States, placing its first ever win in total-day viewership among all cable networks as measured by ACNielsen. In June of that year, The Walt Disney Company announced that it would stop advertising or promoting food or beverage products that do not meet strict nutritional guidelines on Disney Channel or its other media properties aimed at children by 2015, purportedly becoming the first media company to take such a stance on stopping the marketing of junk food products to kids (due to its commercial-free format, such advertising appears only in the form of underwriter sponsorships during promotional breaks). On June 15 of that year, the channel premiered the original movie musical "Let It Shine" and the animated series "Gravity Falls".
On July 1, 2012, Disney Channel began providing Descriptive Video Service audio in compliance with the 21st Century Communications and Video Accessibility Act of 2010, which required network owned-and-operated stations and affiliates in the 25 largest television markets as well as the five highest-rated cable and satellite channels (including Disney Channel) to offer audio descriptions for the blind. On July 14, 2012, Disney Channel announced its first television collaboration with Marvel Entertainment (which was acquired by The Walt Disney Company in 2009), in the form of a crossover special that aired on August 16, 2013 called "" featuring characters from "Phineas and Ferb" and the Marvel Universe, the newest animated series, "Wander Over Yonder" debuted after that.
On February 15 and 16, 2014, Disney Channel announced the future of the animated series airing on the channel at the time; it announced that "Gravity Falls" and "Wander Over Yonder" would move to Disney XD but will still air episodes on Disney Channel as part of "Disney XD on Disney Channel", and that "Phineas and Ferb" would go on hiatus, with its production having already been suspended.
On January 17, 2014 a new series "I Didn't Do It" premiered (which ended after two seasons on October 16, 2015) along with the DCOM Cloud 9. 
On May 23, 2014, Disney Channel unveiled a new logo and on-air imaging design; first introduced in January 2014 by the then-new, free-to-air Disney Channel service in Germany, the new logo replaces the boxed design of the previous logo with a more compact wordmark, and incorporates the Mickey Mouse imagery as the dot of the "I" within the Disney script. Designed in collaboration with Disney Channel's U.S. and European operations and the design agencies Royale and BDA, the overall presentation package was designed so that the network could maintain its iconic "wand" idents (where stars of the network's programs either dotted the "I" with a wand or drew out the ears element), and allow such IDs made for the channel's previous on-air imaging to be adapted for use with the new logo – especially in markets where "new" episodes of older Disney Channel programs that had concluded their U.S. run were still premiering. "Girl Meets World" was the first show to use the logo. 
Two other DCOMS premiered including "Zapped" (starring Zendaya) and "How to Build a Better Boy" (starring China Anne McClain and Kelli Burglund). On October 3, 2015 a one-hour special, "Star Wars Rebels Spark of the Rebellion", premiered with 2.74 million viewers.
In 2015 three new series premiered: "KC Undercover" (starring Zendaya), "Best Friends Whenever" (starring Lauren Taylor and Landry Bender), and the "JESSIE" spin-off "BUNK'D". Four new DCOMs also premiered that year: "Bad Hair Day", "Teen Beach 2", "Descendants", and "Invisible Sister". Right after the film "Descendants" finished airing on Disney Channel, it was announced that a CGI-animated short spinoff entitled "Descendants: Wicked World" would be released on September 18, 2015. Former "Phineas and Ferb" storyboard artist Aliki Theofilopoulos Grafft announced on Twitter that she was directing the series, with Jenni Cook as producer, and that the original cast would be reprising their roles. Each episode of the series is going to be under five minutes long, and in January 2016 a DVD titled "Descendants: Wicked World & More" released and had every short from season one, along with the "Rotten To The Choreography" and the "Set It Off" specials. The episodes are about two minutes long. 
On June 3, 2015 Disney Channel announced a new animated series based on the Disney movie "Tangled" with Zachary Levi and Mandy Moore reprising their roles. The new series is set between the events of the film and the start of the 2012 short "Tangled Ever After". Rapunzel is acquainting herself with her parents, her kingdom and the people of Corona. In a press release, Disney said the character will put her crown and impended marriage on hold to "seek out epic adventures." Along for the adventures are her partner Flynn Rider (Eugene), her chameleon sidekick Pascal, the horse Maximus, the Snuggly Duckling Pub Thugs and a new character, Cassandra, described as "a tough-as-nails handmaiden, who becomes Rapunzel's confidant." 
On September 25, 2015, "Dog With a Blog" aired it last episode, after three seasons. On October 16, 2015 "I Didn't Do It" and "Jessie" aired their last episodes, after two and four seasons, respectively.
On January 10, 2016, "Austin and Ally" aired its last two episodes, after four seasons. 
Disney Channel previewed its new live-action series "Stuck in the Middle" on February 14. The series features a Latino family, and will star Jenny Ortega. Disney Channel has also ordered a teen music comedy series, "Bizaardvark", starring newcomers Olivia Rodrigo and Madison Hu . "Bizaardvark" is slated to premiere in the summer of 2016.
Programming.
Disney Channel's schedule currently consists largely of original series aimed at female pre-teens and young teenagers (including live-action series such as "K.C. Undercover", "Best Friends Whenever", "Liv and Maddie", "Stuck in the Middle", "Girl Meets World", and "Bunk'd"), and series aimed at preschoolers as part of its Disney Junior block (such as "Sofia the First", "Jake and the Never Land Pirates", "Mickey Mouse Clubhouse", "Doc McStuffins", "Sheriff Callie's Wild West", "Miles from Tomorrowland" and "The Lion Guard"). The channel also airs repeats of former Disney Channel original series (such as "The Suite Life on Deck", "Good Luck Charlie", "Wizards of Waverly Place", "Dog with a Blog", "Jessie", and "Austin and Ally"), occasional reruns of Disney XD original series part of the "Disney XD on Disney Channel" block (such as "Lab Rats", "Gamer's Guide to Pretty Much Everything", "Kirby Buckets", "Star vs. the Forces of Evil" and "Star Wars Rebels"), original made-for-TV movies, feature films, short-form programs known as "short shows" (which air more commonly on the Disney Junior block, and are used primarily to fill predetermined five-minute gaps between programs) and music videos from artists signed to sister companies Hollywood Records and Walt Disney Records as well as songs featured in recent and upcoming Disney feature film releases (full versions of these music videos typically air only during the video's premiere and as filler between programs, while shorter versions usually air during promo breaks during the current program).
Disney Channel essentially operates as a commercial-free channel, opting not to feature traditional commercial advertisements during its in-show breaks due to concerns that younger viewers may be unable to separate the difference between programs and advertisements, and in order to pay a lower license fee rate to broadcast feature films distributed by major movie studios than ad-supported channels would pay – in lieu of running commercials, Disney Channel maintains underwriter sponsorships with major companies such as Best Western and Mattel, in addition to in-house promotions for the channel's programs (and occasionally, programs seen on other Disney-owned channels, most commonly Disney XD and Disney Junior) and Disney entertainment products.
Atypical of most U.S. cable channels, since 2006, Disney Channel's scripted programs (including shows featured on the Disney Junior block) feature additional scenes played over the closing credits. It also has an unwritten requirement that its original live-action series have no more than six regular cast members ("So Weird" was the last series prior to 2003 to have more than six series regulars within its cast, "Shake It Up" is the only series since that point to exceed the limit as it had seven contract cast members during its second season in 2012-13); "Stuck in the Middle" would also go over this limit, with nine main cast members from the beginning. The channel's series tend to have smaller writing staffs compared to scripted series seen on other broadcast and cable networks (usually featuring around four and eight credited staff writers, instead of the eight to 11 writers commonly found on most scripted shows). Its live-action multi-camera series also commonly utilize a simulated film look (the FilmLook processing for such shows debuting between 2003 and 2008; the HD-compatible 'filmizing' technique for all newer and returning original series produced after 2009, which reduce the video frame rate to 24 frames per second).
During the 1980s and 1990s, Disney Channel ran classic Disney animated shorts released between the 1930s and 1960s, which were removed from the lineup in 2000; since 2009, repackaged versions of these shorts are seen as part of the short series "Re-Micks" and "Have a Laugh!". The channel later debuted "Mickey Mouse", a series of original shorts featuring the classic Disney animated characters including the titular character on June 28, 2013.
Movie library.
Disney Channel often broadcasts a movie most nights during the week and occasionally airs films during the daytime hours, however these are not always necessarily telecasts of a theatrically released film. The channel produces original made-for-cable movies called Disney Channel Original Movies (or DCOMs), which are frequently broadcast during primetime hours. Family-oriented made-for-TV movies began airing on the Disney Channel in October 1983 under the brand Disney Channel Premiere Films with the premiere of "Tiger Town"; the DCOM slate began with the August 1997 premiere of "Northern Lights". After that point, the number of DCOMs that debuted each year began to increase – from two in 1997 to a high of twelve in 2000, when the network premiered a new original movie each month during that year, gradually decreasing to the current rate two to four premieres each year.
Disney Channel previously ran double airings of its original movies on the night of their premiere, until the January 2006 premiere of "High School Musical"; encore presentations of new original movies were also aired during primetime on the Saturday and Sunday after their initial premiere from 2001 (when the channel moved its original movie premieres from Saturdays to Fridays) to 2009, when these encores were reduced to occasional airings on one of the two days, with few exceptions ("Camp Rock" was the first film not to be encored in this manner). "Special edition" airings of its higher-profile original movies are also sometimes aired, including sing-along versions of music-based films (featuring on-screen lyrics for viewers to sing along with the film's songs) and "What's What" editions (styled similarly to "Pop-Up Video", featuring on-screen pop-up facts about the movie and its stars).
"High School Musical 2" is currently the most successful DCOM in terms of popularity and accolades, setting a basic cable record for the single most-watched television program, as its August 2007 debut was watched by 17.2 million viewers (counting sports, this record stood until a December 3, 2007 telecast of a New England Patriots-Baltimore Ravens game on corporate sibling ESPN's "Monday Night Football", which was watched by 17.5 million viewers). "The Cheetah Girls" films were also notably successful in terms of merchandise, and sales for its concert tour and soundtrack albums. The first film in 2003 was the first made-for-TV movie musical in Disney Channel's history, and had a worldwide audience of over 84 million viewers. The second movie was the most successful of the series, bringing in 8.1 million viewers in the U.S. An 86-date concert tour featuring the group was ranked as one of the top 10 concert tours of 2006; the tour broke a record at the Houston Rodeo that was set by Elvis Presley in 1973, selling out with 73,500 tickets sold in three minutes.
In addition to its made-for-cable films, Disney Channel has rights to theatrically released feature films, with some film rights shared with sister network Freeform. Along with films released by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (mainly consisting of releases from Walt Disney Pictures, Walt Disney Animation Studios and Pixar), the channel also maintains rights to films from other studios including Warner Bros. Entertainment, Universal Pictures, The Weinstein Company, Sony Pictures Entertainment, Lions Gate Entertainment, Rankin/Bass Productions, 20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures. Some films released by Bagdasarian Productions (such as "The Chipmunk Adventure" and "Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein") have also aired on Disney Channel, although most of them are not presently owned by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
Films made up roughly half of Disney Channel's daily schedule between 1986 and 1998; the number of movies broadcast on the channel have steadily eroded since then, to the point that films now only air Monday through Thursdays in primetime on an inconsistent basis (with episodes of its original series airing on nights when a film is not scheduled), regularly on weekend late nights and , during the daytime hours also on an inconsistent basis.
"Cadet Kelly", "Camp Rock" and "" are currently the only Disney Channel Original Movies to have aired on a network outside of the Disney Channel brand domestically (the latter two have aired on sister channel ABC Family, while "Cadet Kelly" and "Camp Rock" have also been broadcast on ABC as part of "The Wonderful World of Disney").
On September 13, 2010, Disney Channel began airing theatrical film releases in a letterboxed format on the channel's primary standard definition feed, as a widescreen-style format downconverted from the HD feed; although theatrical movies shot with an aspect ratio of 2.35:1 or 2.40:1 are panned and scanned to fit high-definition sets to eliminate screen burn-in on plasma displays. Partly due to the network advertising mainly its own programs in lieu of traditional commercials, films featured on Disney Channel often run short of their allotted time slot with interstitial programming airing to pad out the remainder of the time period (usually an episode of an original series if a film runs approximately 90 to 100 minutes, an 11-minute-long episode of an original animated series for films running 105 minutes or a mix of music videos, network promotions and short segments for films running longer than 105 minutes).
Related services.
Current sister channels.
Disney XD.
Disney XD is a digital cable and satellite television channel in the United States, which is aimed at young males aged 7–14. The channel was launched on February 13, 2009, replacing predecessor Toon Disney; it carries action and comedy programming from Disney Channel and the former Jetix block from Toon Disney, along with some first-run original programming and off-network syndicated shows. Like its predecessor Toon Disney, but unlike parent network Disney Channel and its sister channel Disney Junior, Disney XD operates as an advertiser-supported service. The channel carries the same name as an unrelated mini-site and media player on Disney.com, which stood for Disney Xtreme Digital, though it is said that the "XD" in the "channel"s name does not have an actual meaning.
Disney Junior.
On May 26, 2010, Disney-ABC Television Group announced the launch of a new digital cable and satellite channel targeted at preschool-aged children called Disney Junior, which debuted on March 23, 2012. The Disney Junior channel – which like Disney Channel (though unlike Disney XD or the channel Disney Junior replaced, Soapnet), is commercial-free – competes with other preschooler-skewing cable channels such as Nick Jr., Qubo and Sprout. The channel features programs from Disney Channel's existing preschool programming library and movies from the Walt Disney Pictures film library. Disney Junior took over the channel space held by Soapnet – a Disney-owned cable channel featuring soap operas – due to that genre's decline in popularity on broadcast television, and the growth of video on demand, online streaming and digital video recorders, negating the need for a linear channel devoted to the soap opera genre. An automated Soapnet feed continued to exist for providers that had not yet made carriage agreements for Disney Junior (such as Dish Network) and those that have kept Soapnet as part of their lineups while adding Disney Junior as an additional channel (such as DirecTV and Cox Communications); After a period during which cable providers unwilling to drop the network immediately retained it to prevent subscriber cancellations, Soapnet ceased full operations on December 31, 2013.
The former Playhouse Disney block on Disney Channel was rebranded as Disney Junior on February 14, 2011; the 22 existing Playhouse Disney-branded cable channels and program blocks outside the United States rebranded under the Disney Junior name over the next two years, concluding with the rebranding of the Russian and Chinese versions in September 2013. Disney-ABC Television Group previously planned to launch a domestic Playhouse Disney Channel in the U.S. (which would have served the same target audience as Disney Junior) in 2001, however this planned network never launched, although dedicated Playhouse Disney Channels did launch outside of the United States.
Former sister channels.
Toon Disney.
Toon Disney launched on April 18, 1998 (coinciding with the 15th anniversary of parent network Disney Channel's launch), and was aimed at children between the ages of 6- and 18 -years-old. The network's main competitors were Turner Broadcasting/Time Warner's Cartoon Network and Boomerang, and Viacom/MTV Networks' Nicktoons. Toon Disney originally operated as a commercial-free service from April 1998 to September 1999, when it became advertiser-supported (unlike Disney Channel). The channel carried a mix of reruns of Walt Disney Television Animation and Disney Channel-produced animated programming, along with some third-party programs from other distributors, animated films and original programming. In 2004, the channel debuted a nighttime program block aimed at children ages 7–14 called Jetix, which featured action-oriented animated and live-action series. During Toon Disney's first year on the air, Disney Channel ran a sampler block of Toon Disney's programming on Sunday nights for interested subscribers. The network ceased operations on February 13, 2009 and was replaced with the preteen male-oriented Disney XD, featuring a broader array of programming, with a heavier emphasis on live-action programs.
Criticism and controversies.
Disney Channel has received heavy criticism by some critics and former viewers for its programming direction in recent years. Critics disapprove of the marketing strategy drafted by former Disney–ABC Television Group president Anne Sweeney, which has resulted in the slanting of the target audience of Disney Channel's programs toward teenyboppers, as well as a decrease in animated programming and an increase in live-action. In 2008, Sweeney had stated that Disney Channel, resulting from its multi-platform marketing strategy using television and music, would become "the major profit driver for the Disney Company."
The channel has also pulled episodes (even once having to reshoot an episode) that have featured subject matter deemed inappropriate due to its humor, the timing of the episode's airing with real-life events, or subject matter considered inappropriate for Disney Channel's target audience. In December 2008, the "Hannah Montana" episode "No Sugar, Sugar" was pulled before its broadcast after complaints from parents who saw the episode through video on demand services due to misconceptions regarding diabetics and sugar intake (the Mitchel Musso character of Oliver Oken is revealed in the episode to have been diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes). Portions of that episode were subsequently rewritten and re-filmed to become the season three episode "Uptight (Oliver's Alright)," which aired in September 2009.
In December 2011, Disney Channel pulled episodes of two of its original series from the network's broadcast cycle – the season one "Shake It Up" episode "Party It Up," and the "So Random!" episode "Colbie Caillat" – after Demi Lovato (star of "So Random!" parent series "Sonny with a Chance", who was treated for bulimia nervosa in 2010) objected on Twitter to jokes featured in both episodes (the "Shake It Up" episode, in particular) that made light of eating disorders. On May 17, 2013, the channel pulled "Quitting Cold Koala", a second season episode of "Jessie", prior to its scheduled premiere broadcast, due to parental concerns over a scene in which a character's gluten-free diet leads to him being ridiculed.
Video games.
In 2010, "Disney Channel All Star Party" was released for the Nintendo Wii. The four-player mascot party game, in which the stages resemble board games, features characters from Disney Channel programs such as "Sonny with a Chance", "Wizards of Waverly Place" and "JONAS L.A." Several video games based on the Disney Channel animated series "Phineas and Ferb" were released by Disney Interactive Studios. The Disney Channel website also features various flash games incorporating characters from the channel's various program franchises.
International.
Disney Channel has established its channels in various countries worldwide including Canada, South Africa, Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, India, Australia, the Czech Republic, New Zealand, the Middle East, Scandinavia, the Baltic states, United Kingdom, Ireland, Portugal, the Caribbean, the Netherlands, Israel and Flanders. Disney Channel also licenses its programming to air on certain other broadcast and cable channels outside the United States regardless as to whether an international version of Disney Channel exists in the country.
Disney Channel International is a unit of Disney Channels Worldwide, all Disney Channel-branded pay television channels are fully owned by The Walt Disney Company.

</doc>
<doc id="77813" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77813" title="Pope Nicholas II">
Pope Nicholas II

Pope Nicholas II (; ca. 990/995 - 27 July 1061), born Gérard de Bourgogne, was Pope from 24 January 1059 until his death. At the time of his election, he was Bishop of Florence.
Antipope Benedict X.
Benedict X was elected in 1058, his election having been arranged by the Count of Tusculum. However, a number of cardinals alleged that the election was irregular, and that votes had been bought; these cardinals were forced to flee Rome. Hildebrand, later Pope Gregory VII, when he heard of Benedict X's election, decided to oppose it, and obtained the support for the election of Gérard de Bourgogne instead. In December 1058, those cardinals who had opposed Benedict X's election met at Siena and elected Gérard as Pope instead. He then took the name Nicholas II.
Nicholas II proceeded towards Rome, along the way holding a synod at Sutri, where he pronounced Benedict X deposed and excommunicated. The supporters of Nicholas II then gained control of Rome and forced Benedict X to flee to Gerard of Galeria. Having arrived in Rome, Nicholas II then proceeded to wage war against Benedict X and his supporters with Norman assistance. At an initial battle in Campagna in early 1059, Nicholas II was not wholly successful. But later that same year, his forces conquered Praeneste, Tusculum, and Numentanum, and in the autumn took Galeria, forcing Benedict X to surrender and renounce the Papacy.
Relationship with the Normans.
To secure his position, Nicholas II at once entered into relations with the Normans. The Pope wanted to re-take Sicily for Christianity, and he saw the Normans as the perfect force to crush the Muslims. The Normans were by this time firmly established in southern Italy, and later in the year 1059 the new alliance was cemented at Melfi, where the Pope, accompanied by Hildebrand, Cardinal Humbert, and Abbot Desiderius of Monte Cassino, solemnly invested Robert Guiscard with the duchies of Apulia, Calabria, and Sicily, and Richard of Aversa with the principality of Capua, in return for oaths of fealty and the promise of assistance in guarding the rights of the Church.
This arrangement, which was based on no firmer foundation than the forged "Donation of Constantine", was destined to give the papacy independence from both the Eastern and Western Empires. Its first fruits were Norman aid in taking Galeria, where Antipope Benedict X was hiding, and the end of the subordination of the papacy to the Roman nobles.
Subordination of Milan.
Meanwhile, Nicholas II sent Peter Damian and Bishop Anselm of Lucca as legates to Milan, to resolve the conflict between the Patarenes and the archbishop and clergy. The result was a fresh triumph for the papacy. Archbishop Wido, facing ruinous ecclesiastical conflict in Milan, submitted to the terms of the legates, which subordinated Milan to Rome. The new relation was advertised by the unwilling attendance of Wido and the other Milanese bishops at the council summoned to the Lateran Palace in April 1059. This council not only continued the Hildebrandine reforms by sharpening the discipline of the clergy, but marked an epoch in the history of the papacy by its famous regulation of future elections to the Holy See.
Election reform.
Previously, Papal elections had effectively been controlled by the Roman aristocracy, unless the Emperor was strong enough to be able to intervene from a distance to impose his will. As a result of the battles with the Antipope Benedict X, Nicholas II wished to reform papal elections. At the synod held in the Lateran at Easter, 1059, Pope Nicholas brought 113 bishops to Rome to consider a number of reforms, including a change in the election procedure. The electoral reform adopted by that synod amounted to a declaration of independence on the part of the church. Henceforth, popes were to be selected by the Cardinals in assembly at Rome.

</doc>
<doc id="77815" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77815" title="Fox Sports Networks">
Fox Sports Networks

Fox Sports Networks (FSN; formerly known as Fox Sports Net & simply FSN), is the collective name for a group of regional sports networks in the United States that are primarily owned and operated by the Fox Entertainment Group division of 21st Century Fox. Each of the networks carry regional broadcasts of sporting events from various professional, collegiate and high school sports teams (with broadcasts typically exclusive to each individual network, although some are shown on multiple FSN networks within a particular team's designated market area), along with regional and national sports discussion, documentary and analysis programs.
Depending on their individual team rights, some Fox Sports Networks maintain overflow feeds available via digital cable, telco and satellite providers in their home markets, which may provide alternate programming when not used to carry game broadcasts that the main feed cannot carry due to scheduling conflicts. Fox Sports Networks is headquartered in Houston, Texas, with master control facilities based in both Houston and Los Angeles; FSN also maintains production facilities at Stage 19 at Universal Studios Florida (which formerly served as home of Nickelodeon Studios until its closure in 2005).
History.
Beginnings.
At the dawn of the cable television era, many regional sports networks (RSNs) vied to compete with the largest national sports network, ESPN. The most notable were the SportsChannel networks, which first began operating in 1976 with the launch of the original SportsChannel (now MSG Plus) in the New York City area and later branched out into channels serving Chicago and Florida; Prime Network, which launched in 1983 with Home Sports Entertainment (now Fox Sports Southwest) as its charter member network and later branched out onto the West Coast as "Prime Sports"; and SportSouth, an RSN operated by the Turner Broadcasting System.
On October 31, 1995, News Corporation, which ten years earlier launched the Fox Broadcasting Company, a general entertainment broadcast network that formed its own sports division in 1994 with the acquisition of the television rights to the National Football Conference of the National Football League, entered into a joint venture with TCI's Liberty Media, acquiring a 50% ownership interest in the company's Prime Sports affiliates. On July 3, 1996, News Corporation and Liberty Media/TCI announced that the Prime Sports networks would be rebranded under the new "Fox Sports Net" brand; the Prime Sports-branded affiliates were officially relaunched as Fox Sports Net on November 1 of that year. That same year, Fox purchased SportSouth from Turner and rebranded that network as Fox Sports South.
On June 30, 1997, the Fox/Liberty joint venture purchased a 40% interest in Cablevision's sports properties including the SportsChannel America networks, Madison Square Garden, and the New York Knicks and New York Rangers professional sports franchises, a deal worth $850 million; the deal formed the venture National Sports Partners to run the owned-and-operated regional networks. In early 1998, SportsChannel America was integrated into the Fox Sports Net family of networks; SportsChannel Florida, however, remained as the lone SportsChannel America-branded network before it joined FSN as well in 2000 after News Corporation and Cablevision purchased Florida Panthers owner Wayne Huizenga's controlling interest in that network.
On July 11, 2000, Comcast purchased a majority interest in the Minneapolis-based Midwest Sports Channel and Baltimore-based Home Team Sports from Viacom. News Corporation, a minority owner in both networks, wanted to acquire them outright and integrate the two networks into Fox Sports Net. The company filed a lawsuit against Comcast ten days later on July 21, in an attempt to block the sale. On September 7, 2000, as part of a settlement between the two companies, Comcast traded its equity interest in Midwest Sports Channel (which became Fox Sports Net North) to News Corporation in exchange for exclusive ownership of Home Team Sports (which subsequently joined competing regional sports network Comcast SportsNet as Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic).
Ownership realignments.
In September 2004, Fox Sports Net became known simply as "FSN"; however the former name remained in common use until 2010, when "Fox Sports Local" was adopted for use in referencing its regional networks. On February 22, 2005, Fox's then-parent company, News Corporation, acquired full ownership of FSN/Fox Sports Local, following an asset trade with Cablevision Systems Corporation, in which Fox sold its interest in Madison Square Garden and the arena's NBA and NHL team tenants in exchange for acquiring sole ownership of Fox Sports Ohio and Fox Sports Florida. Cablevision simultaneously gained sole ownership of Fox Sports Chicago and Fox Sports New York, and a 50% interest in Fox Sports New England (with Comcast retaining its existing 50% stake); Fox and Cablevision, however, retained joint ownership of Fox Sports Bay Area.
Fox Sports Chicago ceased operations in June 2006, after losing the regional cable television rights to local professional teams (including the Chicago Bulls, Blackhawks, Cubs and White Sox) two years earlier to the newly launched Comcast SportsNet Chicago.
On December 22, 2006, News Corporation sold its interest in four Fox Sports regional networks – FSN Utah, FSN Pittsburgh, FSN Northwest and FSN Rocky Mountain – as well as its 38.5% ownership stake in satellite provider DirecTV to Liberty Media for $550 million in cash and stock, in exchange for Liberty's 16.3% stake in News Corporation. On May 4, 2009, DirecTV Group Inc. announced it would become a part of Liberty's entertainment unit, with plans to spin off certain properties into a separate company under the DirecTV name, which would operate the four acquired FSN-affiliated networks through DirecTV Sports Networks, a new division formed on November 19, 2009, upon the spin-off's completion.
On April 30, 2007, Cablevision sold its 50% interests in the New England and Bay Area networks to Comcast for $570 million; both networks became part of Comcast SportsNet, with FSN New England relaunching as Comcast SportsNet New England in July 2007 and FSN Bay Area relaunching as Comcast SportsNet Bay Area March 2008. Despite Cablevision's sale of the networks, the channels continued to use "Fox Sports Net/National Sports Partners" in its copyright tag until 2008 (the copyright used has since changed to "National Sports Programming").
On April 1, 2011, DirecTV Sports Networks rebranded its FSN regional affiliates under the Root Sports brand. In 2012, FSN/Fox Sports Local relocated its headquarters from the Westwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California to Houston, Texas. It was also in 2012 when FSN/Fox Sports Local was re-branded to its current branding. The FSN owned-and-operated networks were spun off along with most of News Corporation's U.S. entertainment properties into 21st Century Fox on July 1, 2013.
On-screen graphics.
FSN has often served as the testing ground for innovations in sports broadcast graphics developed by Fox and the source of inspiration for the graphical appearances adopted by other networks. The Fox Sports Networks were the first U.S. sports channels to introduce a banner graphic to display the game's score and remaining length placed on the top of the screen (initially known as the FoxBox). Since FSN implemented with the top-screen banner graphic, many other major networks have abandoned the corner box graphic in favor of the bar.
2001–2005.
FSN first used the scoring banner for most of its broadcasts beginning in 2001, using a simpler layout than the versions used in more recent years. It was designed as a transparent black rectangle, with abbreviations of the participating teams displayed in white and scores placed in yellow boxes (the white boxes for scores were used on some broadcasts until 2002), and the quarter or inning, time or number of outs, and a horizontal version of the Fox Sports Net logo (with the "FOX" in the logo rendered in a white box until sometime in 2004, later changing to blue) on the far right. For baseball broadcasts, a baseball diamond graphic was placed on the far left with the pitch count/speed on the right side. In mid-July 2003, Fox Sports Net adopted new graphics for its baseball broadcasts, which were later expanded to college football, hockey and basketball broadcasts, despite retaining the banner. Early in 2004, the logo was changed to reveal the "FSN" pillbox logo and "FOX SPORTSNET" in black; in July of that year, the "FOX SPORTSNET" logo was replaced with the region branding of the individual FSN channel. Fox Sports Net would formally become known as FSN in September 2004.
The score banner used for FSN telecasts was also used by Fox Sports for its Major League Baseball broadcasts on the Fox Broadcasting Company, albeit with a different graphics package, from 2001 until the 2004 postseason, with modifications to the banner in 2003 to more closely mirror the version used by FSN.
2005–2008.
In mid-June 2005, the banner was given a cosmetic upgrade, although it otherwise continued to use the graphics introduced in July 2003. The team abbreviations were rendered in white or black text in the team's main color (depending on color contrast); the scores were also placed in white boxes, accompanied by a flash effect and a futuristic computer sound effect when one of the teams scored. During baseball telecasts, a flash effect was also used for the far-left diamond graphic (itself altered in 2006), to represent the bases being circled with an underside "HOME RUN" graphic below the banner and the team or player name in electronic lettering. The "FSN" logo at far right was also rendered in a black ovular shape with the region name rendered in white.
2008–2011.
For the 2008 college football season, the scoring banner reverted to a box design at the top-left portion of the screen (with no FSN branding, other than the logo bug of the local network in the top-right corner), featuring a Collegiate-style typeface, with similarities to Fox's current graphic styling and the text style used by Big Ten Network. The box changes to the colors of the team in possession of the ball, with down information in the top portion and a text box with information such as punt hangtime extending from the bottom; the box flipped to indicate a score and the size of the possessing team's scoring area expanded with the possession arrow. Variations of the package were later implemented for professional sports events televised by FSN affiliates, beginning with NHL telecasts on October 11, 2008, NBA telecasts on October 28 (initially using a smaller score box placed at the bottom-right for the 2008–09 season, before switching to a horizontal "strip" design for the 2009–10 season), and Major League Baseball games on both FSN and Fox in April 2009.
New wordmark logos for each FSN owned-and-operated affiliate also debuted with the graphics package, featuring a bold "FS" abbreviation, followed by the region name (or a team name during professional sports events, also colored in the respective team's colors); the word "Net" was also dropped from the names of each channel. FSN affiliates owned by DirecTV Sports Networks retained the previous "pillbox" logo despite also adopting the new graphics; however, FSN New York and the Comcast-owned FSN affiliates were relaunched under the respective MSG Plus and Comcast SportsNet brands prior to the adoption of the new FSN package.
In 2010, FSN affiliates also began to increase their use of the standard Fox Sports brand through various means, including the use of the standard Fox Sports microphone flags, the introduction of localized versions of the Fox Sports frontcap before live broadcasts, and the incorporation of the Fox Sports logo into a new logo animation for the network's bug. In 2011, some FSN networks also followed the lead of the Fox network by framing its graphics for the aspect ratio (which resulted in the logo bug being shifted farther to the right outside of the safe area, and the corner score box to the far left) and converting its standard definition feeds to broadcast HD content in a letterboxed format.
2011–present.
At the start of the 2011 Major League Baseball season, Fox's regional sports networks and national programming began using an on-air presentation identical to that used for national Fox Sports telecasts aired on the Fox Broadcasting Company. It also phased in a graphics package designed by Troika Design Group – however, in-game graphics still used the previous, metallic FSN designs until 2012.
Fox Sports introduced an updated logo across all of its properties on September 1, 2012, with its regional networks dropping the "FS" wordmark entirely and adopting individual logos combining the Fox Sports logo and the name of each channel's regional name (or team name in bugs shown during game broadcasts).
Networks.
Partner services.
Comcast SportsNet.
From its inception in 1997 until July 31, 2012, Comcast maintained an agreement to carry select programming sourced from Fox Sports Net on its six Comcast SportsNet regional networks: Comcast SportsNet Bay Area, Comcast SportsNet California, Comcast SportsNet Chicago, Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic, Comcast SportsNet New England and Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia.
From September 2012 to September 2013, Fox syndicated select college football games produced by the Fox Sports regional networks to broadcast television stations in some of these markets. Comcast Sports Net Mid-Atlantic resumed airing select Fox Sports-produced ACC games in 2013; however, Fox Sports programming has not returned to any other CSN network. , most of Fox Sports Networks' other programming is presently carried in the Baltimore and Washington, D.C. markets on MASN2 and in the Boston market on the New England Sports Network (NESN), however Fox Sports does not have distributors for its national RSN programming in the Chicago, Philadelphia and San Francisco markets.
Fox College Sports (FCS).
Fox Sports Networks also operates Fox College Sports (FCS), a slate of three digital cable channels (Fox College Sports Atlantic, Fox College Sports Central, and Fox College Sports Pacific) featuring programming divided by region (primarily collegiate and high school sports, as well as minor league sports events) from each individual FSN network; the FCS networks also carry each affiliate's regional sports news programs and non-news-and-event programming (such as coaches shows, team magazines, and documentaries). The three networks are, more or less, condensed versions of the 22 FSN-affiliated networks (including Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic), though the channels also show international events that do not fit within the programming inventories of FSN or Fox Soccer Plus (and prior to 2013, the latter's now-defunct parent Fox Soccer), such as the Commonwealth Games, World University Games and the FINA World Swimming Championships.
The three FCS channels offer FSN feeds from the following channels, including live Big 12 Conference football, Pac-12 Conference football and basketball and Atlantic Coast Conference basketball games. The channels also rebroadcast shows originally produced by and shown on the following listed networks:
Fox College Sports also broadcasts high school and Independent Women's Football League games, and college magazine and coach's shows. Fox College Sports formerly partnered with Big Ten Network to provide programming.
High definition.
All of the Fox Sports Networks regional affiliates maintain high definition simulcast feeds presented in 720p (the default resolution format for 21st Century Fox's broadcast and pay television properties). All sports programming broadcast on each of the networks (including most team-related analysis and discussion programs, and non-event amateur sports programs) is broadcast in a format optimized for 16:9 widescreen displays, with graphics now framed within a widescreen safe area rather than the 4:3 safe area, intended to be shown in a letterboxed format for standard definition viewers.
National programs.
Programming strategy.
The programming strategy adopted by most of the Fox Sports Networks is to acquire the play-by-play broadcast rights to major sports teams in their regional market (this does not include NFL games, since the league's contracts require all games to be aired on broadcast television in each participating team's local markets). In addition to local play-by-play coverage, the FSN networks also broadcast and produce pre-game shows, post-game shows, and weekly "magazine" shows centered on the teams that maintain rights with the individual network. In some markets, FSN competes directly with other regional sports networks for the broadcast rights to team-specific programming.
FSN has competed directly with ESPN in acquiring the conference rights to various collegiate sports events. One notable agreement is that with the Pac-12 Conference, in which packages of football and men's basketball regular season games are broadcast across all FSN networks within the regions served by each Pac-12 member university. Fox Sports Networks broadcasts the majority of the Pac-12 Conference Men's Basketball Tournament, except the tournament final, as well as a few Pac-12 matches from other conference-sanctioned sports (such as baseball and volleyball).
Besides play-by-play game rights, FSN provided a common set of programming that was available to all its regional sports networks, most notably "The Dan Patrick Show", "The Best Damn Sports Show Period" and "Final Score" ("TBDSSP" and "Final Score" eventually ceased production, while "The Dan Patrick Show" later moved to the NBC Sports Network). Until August 2012, in some of regions served by that RSN, member channels of the competing Comcast SportsNet (as mentioned above) carried FSN programming through broadcast agreements with Fox Sports.
Fox Sports Networks' national sports telecasts were formerly marketed under the "FSN" brand; these national programs began to use more generic branding with fewer references to FSN or Fox in 2008, as a result of a number of Fox Sports Net affiliates being rebranded or realigned with other RSN chains (including FSN New England and FSN Bay Area, which both became part of Comcast SportsNet; FSN New York's relaunch as MSG Plus, the sister to MSG Network; and the eventual relaunch of several FSN affiliates acquired by DirecTV Sports Networks under the Root Sports brand), however these networks have since reverted to utilizing Fox branding on their FSN-syndicated broadcasts.
National prime time programming.
In addition to regional programming, the Fox Sports Networks carry some prime time programming distributed to all of the regional networks (including past and present series such as "The Best Damn Sports Show Period" and "Chris Myers Interviews"). FSN has tried to compete with ESPN in regards to original programming, most notably with the "Fox Sports National Sports Report", a daily sports news program designed to compete with ESPN's "SportsCenter", which debuted on FSN in 1996. Originally a two-hour program, the running time of "National Sports Report" was steadily cut back (eventually dwindling to 30 minutes) as its ratings declined and the cost of producing the program increased. FSN hired popular former "SportsCenter" anchor Keith Olbermann and used him to promote the show heavily; ratings continued to slide, however, leading Fox Sports to cancel the "National Sports Report", which aired its last edition in February 2002.
In some markets, FSN aired the "Regional Sports Report" (whose headline title was usually customized with the name of the region in which the particular program was broadcast, such as the "Midwest Sports Report" or "Detroit Sports Report"), a companion news program focusing primarily on regional sports as well as highlights and news on other sports teams that debuted in 2000 to complement the "National Sports Report"; many of the regional reports were cancelled in 2002 due to increasing costs of producing the individual programs.
Other shows.
In addition, FSN airs an extensive lineup of poker shows, including "Poker Superstars Invitational Tournament" and "MansionPoker.net PokerDome Challenge". Recently, the World Poker Tour broadcast its seventh season on FSN as well.
Pay-per-view.
FSN distributed its first pay-per-view event on November 10, 2006, a boxing match in which former heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield defeated Fres Oquendo in a unanimous decision at the Alamodome in San Antonio, Texas. The fight was also streamed free of charge on the FoxSports.com website outside the United States.
Americans in Focus.
In February 2008, FSN launched a public service initiative called "Americans in Focus", with the sponsorship support of Farmers Insurance. This initiative consists of one-minute vignettes profiling persons of non-Caucasian ethnicity, with segments airing on the FSN networks in February 2008 and 2009 during Black History Month, from September 15 to October 15, 2008 for Hispanic Heritage Month and in March 2009 for Asian Pacific American Heritage Month. The "Americans in Focus" vignettes and the companion sub-site on the Fox Sports website were discontinued in April 2009.

</doc>
<doc id="77816" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77816" title="Pope Vitalian">
Pope Vitalian

Pope Vitalian (; died 27 January 672) reigned from 30 July 657 to his death in 672. He was born in Segni, Lazio, the son of Anastasius.
Reign.
After the death of Pope Eugene I on 2 or 3 June 657, Vitalian was elected his successor, and was consecrated and enthroned on 30 July. He kept his baptismal name as pope. Like Eugene, Vitalian tried to restore the connection with Constantinople by making friendly advances to the Eastern Emperor Constans II and to prepare the way for the settlement of the Monothelite controversy. He sent letters (synodica) announcing his elevation to the Emperor and to Patriarch Peter of Constantinople, who was inclined to Monothelitism. The Emperor confirmed the privileges of the Holy See as head of the Catholic Church and sent to Rome a codex of the Gospels in a cover of gold richly ornamented with precious stones as a good-will gesture.
The Patriarch Peter also replied, although his answer was somewhat noncommittal as to Monothelitism, a belief he defended. In his letter, he gave the impression of being in accord with the pope, whose letter to Peter had expounded the Catholic Faith. Thus ecclesiastical intercourse between Rome and Constantinople was restored, but the mutual reserve over the dogmatic question of Monothelitism remained. Vitalian's name was entered on the diptychs of the churches in Byzantium—the only name of a pope so entered between the reign of Honorius I (d. 638) and the Sixth Ecumenical Council of 680–81. The inclusion of Vitalian's name on the diptych was seen by some as being too conciliatory towards heresy, but that charge was unfounded.
Vitalian showed reciprocity toward Constans when the latter came to Rome in 663 to spend twelve days there during a campaign against the Lombards. On 5 July, the pope and members of the Roman clergy met the Emperor at the sixth milestone and accompanied him to St. Peter's Basilica, where the Emperor offered gifts. The following Sunday, Constans went in state to St. Peter's, offered a pallium wrought with gold, and was present during the Mass celebrated by the pope. The Emperor dined with the pope on the following Saturday, attended Mass again on Sunday at St. Peter's, and after Mass took leave of the pope. On his departure Constans removed a large number of bronze artworks, including the bronze tiles from the roof of the Pantheon, which had been dedicated to Christian worship.
Constans then moved on to Sicily, oppressed the population, and was assassinated at Syracuse in 668. Vitalian supported Constans' son Constantine IV against the usurper Mezezius and thus helped him attain the throne. As Constantine had no desire to maintain the Monothelite decree of his father, Pope Vitalian made use of this inclination to take a more decided stand against Monothelitism and to win the Emperor over to orthodoxy. In this latter attempt, however, he did not succeed. The Monothelite Patriarch Theodore I of Constantinople removed Vitalian's name from the diptychs. It was not until the Sixth Ecumenical Council (681) that Monothelitism was suppressed and Vitalian's name was replaced on the diptychs of the churches in Byzantium.
Relations with England.
Pope Vitalian was successful in improving relations with England, where the Anglo-Saxon and British clergies were divided regarding various ecclesiastical customs. At the Synod of Whitby, King Oswy of Northumberland accepted Roman practices regarding the keeping of Easter and the shape of the tonsure. Together with King Ecgberht of Kent, he sent the priest Wighard to Rome, to be consecrated there after the death of Archbishop Deusdedit of Canterbury in 664, but Wighard died at Rome of the plague.
Vitalian wrote to King Oswy promising to send a suitable bishop to England as soon as possible. Hadrian, abbot of a Neapolitan abbey, was selected, but he considered himself unworthy to be bishop. At his recommendation a highly educated monk, Theodore of Tarsus, who understood both Latin and Greek, was chosen as Archbishop of Canterbury and consecrated on 26 March 668. Accompanied by Abbot Hadrian, Theodore went to England, where he was recognized as the head of the Church of England.
Ravenna.
The archiepiscopal See of Ravenna reported directly to Rome. Archbishop Maurus (644–71) sought to end this dependence, and thus make his see autocephalous. When Pope Vitalian called upon him to justify his theological views, he refused to obey and declared himself independent of Rome, thus becoming a schismatic. The pope excommunicated him, but Maurus did not submit, and even went so far as to declare the pope excommunicated.
Emperor Constans II sided with the archbishop and issued an edict removing the Archbishop of Ravenna from the patriarchal jurisdiction of Rome. He ordained that the former should receive the pallium from the emperor. The successor of Maurus, Reparatus, was in fact consecrated in 671. It was not until the reign of Pope Leo II (682–83) that the independence of the See of Ravenna was suppressed: Emperor Constantine IV revoked the edict of Constans and confirmed the ancient rights of the Roman See over the See of Ravenna.
Authority over Eastern Church.
Vitalian enforced his authority as supreme pontiff in the Eastern regions of the Church. Bishop John of Lappa had been deposed by a synod under the presidency of the Metropolitan Paulus. John appealed to the pope and was imprisoned by Paulus for so doing. He escaped, however, and went to Rome, where Vitalian held a synod in December 667 to investigate the matter and pronounced John guiltless. He then wrote to Paulus demanding the restoration of John to his diocese and the return of the monasteries which had been unjustly taken from him. At the same time the pope directed the metropolitan to remove two deacons who had married after consecration.
The introduction of church organ music is traditionally believed to date from the time of Vitalian's papacy.
Vitalian died on January 27, 672. Venerated as a saint by the Roman Catholic church, his feast day is celebrated each year on January 27.

</doc>
<doc id="77819" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77819" title="Movie theater">
Movie theater

A movie theater (also called a cinema) is a venue, usually a building, that contains an auditorium for viewing films for entertainment. Most, but not all, movie theaters are commercial operations catering to the general public, who attend by purchasing a ticket. Some movie theaters, however, are operated by non-profit organizations or societies which charge members a membership fee to view films.
The film is projected with a movie projector onto a large projection screen at the front of the auditorium while the dialogue, sounds and music are played through a number of wall-mounted speakers. Since the 1970s, subwoofers have been used for low-pitched sounds. In the 2010s, most movie theaters are equipped for digital cinema projection, removing the need to create and transport a physical film print on a heavy reel.
A great variety of films are shown at cinemas, ranging from animated films for children, blockbusters for general audiences and documentaries for patrons who are interested in non-fiction topics. The smallest movie theaters have a single viewing room with a single screen. In the 2010s, most movie theaters have multiple screens. The largest theater complexes, which are called multiplexes–a design developed in the U.S. in the 1960s–have up to 25 screens. The audience members typically sit on padded seats which in most theaters are set up on a sloped floor, with the highest part at the rear of the theater. Movie theaters typically sell soft drinks, popcorn and candy and some theaters also sell hot fast food. In some jurisdictions, movie theaters are licensed to sell alcoholic drinks.
Terminology.
A movie theater may also be referred to as a movie theatre, movie house, film house, film theater or picture house. In the US, theater has long been the preferred spelling, while in the UK, Canada and elsewhere it is theatre.
However, some US theaters opt to use the British spelling in their own names, a practice supported by the National Association of Theatre Owners, while apart from North America most English-speaking countries use the term cinema , alternatively spelled and pronounced kinema . The latter terms, as well as their derivative adjectives "cinematic" and "kinematic", ultimately derive from Greek κινῆμα, κινήματος (kinema, kinematos)—"movement", "motion". In the countries where those terms are used, the word "theatre" is usually reserved for live performance venues.
Colloquial expressions, mostly applied to motion pictures and motion picture theaters collectively, include "the silver screen" (formerly sometimes "sheet") and "the big screen" (contrasted with the smaller screen of a television set). Specific to North American term is "the movies", while specific terms in the UK are "the pictures", "the flicks" and for the facility itself "the flea pit" (or "fleapit"). A screening room is a small theater, often a private one, such as for the use of those involved in the production of motion pictures or in a large private residence.
The etymology of the term "movie theatre" involves the term "movie", which is a "shortened form of moving picture in the cinematographic sense" that was first used in 1896 and "theatre", which originated in the "...late 14c., an "open air place in ancient times for viewing spectacles and plays". The term "theater" comes from the Old French word "theatre", from the 12th century and "...directly from Latin theatrum meant 'play-house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater'", which in turn came from the Greek word "theatron", which meant "theater; the people in the theater; a show, a spectacle," literally "place for viewing." The use of the word "theatre" to mean a "building where plays are shown" dates from the 1570s in the English language.
History.
Magic lantern shows.
The earliest precursors to movies were magic lantern shows. Magic lanterns used a glass lens, a shutter and a powerful lamp to project images from glass slides onto a white wall or screen. These slides were originally hand-painted. The invention of the Argand lamp in the 1790s, limelight in the 1820s and the intensely bright electric arc lamp in the 1860s increased the brightness of the images. The magic lantern could project rudimentary moving images, which was achieved by the use of various types of mechanical slides. Typically, two glass slides, one with the stationary part of the picture and the other with the part that was to move, would be placed one on top of the other and projected together, then the moving slide would be hand-operated, either directly or by means of a lever or other mechanism. Chromotrope slides, which produced eye-dazzling displays of continuously cycling abstract geometrical patterns and colors, were operated by means of a small crank and pulley wheel that rotated a glass disc. Still photographs were used later on after the widespread availability of photography technologies after the mid-19th century. Magic lantern shows were often given at fairs or as part of magic shows. A magic lantern show at the 1851 World's Fair caused a sensation among the audience.
Silent film.
The next significant step towards movies was the development of an understanding of image movement. Simulations of movement date as far back as to 1828, when Paul Roget discovered the phenomenon he called "persistence of vision". Roget showed that when a series of still images are shown rapidly in front of a viewer's eye, the images merge into one registered image that appears to show movement, an optical illusion, since the image is not actually moving. This experience was further demonstrated through Roget's introduction of the thaumatrope, a device which spun a disk with an image on its surface at a fairly high rate of speed. The French Lumière brothers' (Louis and Auguste Lumière) first film, "Sortie de l'usine Lumière de Lyon", shot in 1894, is considered the first true motion picture.
From 1894 to the late 1920s, movie theatres showed silent films, which were films with no synchronized recorded sound or dialogue. In silent films for entertainment, the dialogue was transmitted through muted gestures, mime and title cards, which contained a written indication of the plot or key dialogue. The idea of combining motion pictures with recorded sound is nearly as old as film itself, but because of the technical challenges involved, synchronized dialogue was only made practical in the late 1920s with the perfection of the Audion amplifier tube and the introduction of the Vitaphone system. During silent films, a pianist, theatre organist, or in large cities, even a small orchestra would often play music to accompany the films. Pianists and organists would either play from sheet music or improvise; an orchestra would play from sheet music. After the release of "The Jazz Singer" in 1927, the "talkies", also known as "sound film" or "talking pictures" became more and more commonplace. Within a decade, popular widespread production of silent films had ceased, hence production moved into the sound era, in which movies were accompanied by synchronized sound recordings of spoken dialogue, music and sound effects.
Design.
Traditionally a movie theater, like a stage theater, consists of a single auditorium with rows of comfortable padded seats, as well as a foyer area containing a box office for buying tickets, a counter and/or self-service facilities for buying snacks and drinks in the movie theater lobby, film posters, arcade games, movie schedules, theater entrances, entrance halls, entrance signs, and washrooms. Stage theaters are sometimes converted into movie theaters by placing a screen in front of the stage and adding a projector; this conversion may be permanent, or temporary for purposes such as showing arthouse fare to an audience accustomed to plays. The familiar characteristics of relatively low admission and open seating can be traced to Samuel Roxy Rothafel, an early movie theater impresario. Many of these early theaters contain a balcony, an elevated level across the auditorium above the theater's rearmost seats. The rearward main floor "loge" seats were sometimes larger, softer, and more widely spaced and sold for a higher price.
In conventional low pitch viewing floors the preferred seating arrangement is to use staggered rows. While a less efficient use of floor space this allows a somewhat improved sight line between the patrons seated in the next row toward the screen, provided they do not lean toward one another.
"Stadium seating", popular in modern multiplexes, actually dates back to the 1920s. The 1922 Princess Theatre in Honolulu, Hawaii featured "stadium seating," sharply raked rows of seats extending from in front of the screen back towards the ceiling. It gives patrons a clear sight line over the heads of those seated in front of them. Modern "stadium seating" was utilized in IMAX theaters, which have very tall screens, beginning in the early 1970s.
Rows of seats are divided by one or more aisles so that there are seldom more than 20 seats in a row. This allows easier access to seating, as the space between rows is very narrow. Depending on the angle of rake of the seats, the aisles have steps. In older theaters, aisle lights were often built into the end seats of each row to help patrons find their way in the dark. Since the advent of stadium theaters with stepped aisles, each step in the aisles may be outlined with small lights to prevent patrons from tripping in the darkened theater. In movie theaters, the auditorium may also have lights that go to a low level, when the movie is going to begin.
Theaters often have booster seats for children and other short people to put on the seat, to sit higher, for a better view. Many modern theaters have accessible seating areas for patrons in wheelchairs.
See also luxury screens below.
Multiplexes and megaplexes.
Canada was the first country in the world to have a two-screen theater. The Elgin Theatre in Ottawa became the first venue to offer two film programs on different screens in 1957 when Canadian theater-owner Nat Taylor converted the dual screen theater into one capable of showing two different movies simultaneously.
Taylor is credited by Canadian sources as the inventor of the multiplex or cineplex; he later founded the Cineplex Odeon Corporation, opening the 18-screen Toronto Eaton Centre Cineplex, the world's largest at the time, in Toronto, Canada.
In the United States, Stanley Durwood of American Multi-Cinema (now AMC Theatres) is credited as pioneering the "multiplex" in 1963 after realizing that he could operate several attached auditoriums with the same staff needed for one through careful management of the start times for each movie. Ward Parkway Center in Kansas City, Missouri had the first multiplex cinema in the United States.
Since the 1960s, multiple-screen theaters have become the norm, and many existing venues have been retrofitted so that they have multiple auditoriums. A single foyer area is shared among them. In the 1970s many large 1920s movie palaces were converted into multiple screen venues by dividing their large auditoriums, and sometimes even the stage space, into smaller theaters.
Because of their size, and amenities like plush seating and extensive food/beverage service, multiplexes and megaplexes draw from a larger geographic area than smaller theaters. As a rule of thumb, they pull audiences from an eight to 12 mile radius, versus a three to five mile radius for smaller theaters (though the size of this radius depends on population density). As a result, the customer geography area of multiplexes and megaplexes typically overlaps with smaller theaters, which face threat of having their audience siphoned by bigger theaters that cut a wider swath in the movie-going landscape.
In most markets, nearly all single-screen theaters (sometimes referred to as a "Uniplex") have gone out of business; the ones remaining are generally used for arthouse films, e.g. the Crest Theatre in downtown Sacramento, California, small-scale productions, film festivals or other presentations. Because of the late development of multiplexes, the term "cinema" or "theater" may refer either to the whole complex or a single auditorium, and sometimes "screen" is used to refer to an auditorium.
A popular film may be shown on multiple screens at the same multiplex, which reduces the choice of other films but offers more choice of viewing times or a greater number of seats to accommodate patrons. Two or three screens may be created by dividing up an existing cinema (as Durwood did with his Roxy in 1964), but newly built multiplexes usually have at least six to eight screens, and often as many as twelve, fourteen or even sixteen.
Although definitions vary, a large multiplex with 20 or more screens is usually called a megaplex however in the United Kingdom this was a brand name for large Virgin Cinema (later UGC). The first megaplex is generally considered to be the Kinepolis in Brussels, Belgium, which opened in 1988 with 25 screens and a seating capacity of 7,500. The first theater in the U.S. built from the ground up as a megaplex was the AMC Grand 24 in Dallas, Texas, which opened in May 1995, while the first megaplex in the U.S. based on an expansion of an existing facility was Studio 28 in Grand Rapids, Michigan, which reopened in November 1988 with 20 screens and a seating capacity of 6,000.
Drive-in.
A drive-in movie theater is an outdoor parking area with a screen—sometimes an inflatable screen—at one end and a projection booth at the other. Moviegoers drive into the parking spaces which are sometimes sloped upwards at the front to give a more direct view of the movie screen. Movies are usually viewed through the car windscreen (windshield) although some people prefer to sit on the hood of the car. Sound is either provided through portable loudspeakers located by each parking space, or is broadcast on an FM radio frequency, to be played through the car's stereo system. Because of their outdoor nature, drive-ins usually only operate seasonally, and after sunset. Drive-in movie theaters are mainly found in the United States, where they were especially popular in the 1950s and 1960s. Once numbering in the thousands, about 400 remain in the U.S. today. In some cases, multiplex or megaplex theaters were built on the sites of former drive-in theaters.
Other venues.
Some outdoor movie theaters are just grassy areas where the audience sits upon chairs, blankets or even in hot tubs, and watch the movie on a temporary screen, or even the wall of a building. Colleges and universities have often sponsored movie screenings in lecture halls. The formats of these screenings include 35 mm, 16 mm, DVD, VHS, and even 70 mm in rare cases.
Some alternative methods of showing movies have been popular in the past. In the 1980s the introduction of VHS cassettes made possible video-salons, small rooms where visitors viewed movies on a large TV. These establishments were especially popular in the Soviet Union, where official distribution companies were slow to adapt to changing demand, and so movie theaters could not show popular Hollywood and Asian films.
In 1967 the British government launched seven custom-built mobile cinema units for use as part of the Ministry of Technology campaign to raise standards. Using a very futuristic look, these 27-seat cinema vehicles were designed to attract attention. They were built on a Bedford SB3 chassis with a custom Coventry Steel Caravan extruded aluminum body.
Movies are also commonly shown on airliners in flight, using large screens in each cabin or smaller screens for each group of rows or each individual seat; the airline company sometimes charges a fee for the headphones needed to hear the movie's sound. In a similar fashion, movies are sometimes also shown on trains, such as the Auto Train.
The smallest purpose-built cinema is the Cabiria Cine-Cafe which measures 24 m² (258.3 ft²) and has a seating capacity of 18. It was built by Renata Carneiro Agostinho da Silva (Brazil) in Brasília DF, Brazil in 2008. It is mentioned in the 2010 "Guinness World Records". The World's smallest solar-powered mobile cinema is Sol Cinema in the UK. Touring since 2010 the cinema is actually a converted 1972 caravan. It seats 8-10 at a time. In 2015 it featured in a Lenovo advert for the launch of a new tablet.
The Bell Museum of Natural History in Minneapolis, Minnesota has recently begun summer "bike-ins," inviting only pedestrians or people on bicycles onto the grounds for both live music and movies. In various Canadian cities, including Toronto, Calgary, Ottawa and Halifax, al-fresco movies projected on the walls of buildings or temporarily erected screens in parks operate during the Summer and cater to a pedestrian audience.
The New Parkway Museum in Oakland, California replaces general seating with couches and coffee tables, as well as having a full restaurant menu instead of general movie theater concessions such as popcorn or candy.
3D.
3D film is a system of presenting film images so that they appear to the viewer to be three-dimensional. Visitors usually borrow or keep special glasses to wear while watching the movie. Depending on the system used, these are typically polarized glasses. Three-dimensional movies use two images channeled, respectively, to the right and left eyes to simulate depth by using 3-D glasses with red and blue lenses (anaglyph), polarized (linear and circular), and other techniques. 3-D glasses deliver the proper image to the proper eye and make the image appear to "pop-out" at the viewer and even follow the viewer when he/she moves so viewers relatively see the same image.
The earliest 3-D movies were presented in the 1920s. There have been several prior "waves" of 3D movie distribution, most notably in the 1950s when they were promoted as a way to offer audiences something that they could not see at home on television. Still the process faded quickly and as yet has never been more than a periodic novelty in movie presentation. The "golden era" of 3D film began in the early 1950s with the release of the first color stereoscopic feature, "Bwana Devil". The film starred Robert Stack, Barbara Britton and Nigel Bruce. James Mage was an early pioneer in the 3D craze. Using his 16 mm 3D Bolex system, he premiered his "Triorama" program in February 1953 with his four shorts: "Sunday In Stereo", "Indian Summer", "American Life", and "This is Bolex Stereo". 1953 saw two groundbreaking features in 3D: Columbia's "Man in the Dark" and Warner Bros. "House of Wax", the first 3D feature with stereophonic sound. For many years, most 3-D movies were shown in amusement parks and even "4-D" techniques have been used when certain effects such as spraying of water, movement of seats, and other effects are used to simulate actions seen on the screen. The first decline in the theatrical 3D craze started in August and September 1953.
In 2009, movie exhibitors became more interested in 3D film. The number of 3D screens in theaters is increasing. The RealD company expects 15,000 screens worldwide in 2010. The availability of 3D movies encourages exhibitors to adopt digital cinema and provides a way for theaters to compete with home theaters. One incentive for theaters to show 3D films is that although ticket sales have declined, revenues from 3D tickets have grown. In the 2010s, 3D films became popular again. The IMAX 3D system and digital 3D systems are used (the latter is used in the animated movies of Disney/Pixar).
The RealD 3D system works by using a single digital projector that swaps back and forth between the images for eyes. A filter is placed in front of the projector that changes the polarization of the light coming from the projector. A silver screen is used to reflect this light back at the audience and reduce loss of brightness. There are four other systems available: Volfoni, Master Image, XpanD and Dolby 3D.
When a system is used that requires inexpensive 3D glasses, they can sometimes be kept by the patron. Most theaters have a fixed cost for 3D, while others charge for the glasses, but the latter is uncommon (at least in the United States). For example, in Pathé theaters in the Netherlands the extra fee for watching a 3D film consists of a fixed fee of €1.50, and an optional fee of €1 for the glasses. Holders of the "Pathé Unlimited Gold" pass (see also below) are supposed to bring along their own glasses; one pair, supplied yearly, more robust than the regular type, is included in the price.
IMAX.
IMAX is a system using film with more than ten times the frame size of a 35 mm film to produce image quality far superior to conventional film. IMAX theaters use an oversized screen as well as special projectors. Invented by a Canadian company, the first permanent IMAX theater was at Ontario Place in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
At the IMAX cinema attached to the National Media Museum in Bradford, West Yorkshire, England, in the United Kingdom, visitors to the museum's sixth floor can observe the IMAX projection booth via a glass rear wall, and watch the large format films being loaded and projected.
Programming.
Movie theaters may be classified by the type of movies or when they are shown:
Presentation.
Usually in the 2010s, an admission is for one feature film. Sometimes two feature films are sold as one admission (double feature), with a break in between. Separate admission for a short subject is rare; it is either an extra before a feature film or part of a series of short films sold as one admission (this mainly occurs at film festivals). (See also anthology film.)
In the early decades of "talkie" films, many movie theaters presented a number of shorter items in addition to the feature film. This might include a newsreel, live-action comedy short films, documentary short films, musical short films, and/or cartoon shorts (many classic cartoons series such as the "Looney Tunes" and "Mickey Mouse" shorts were created for this purpose). Examples of this kind of programming are available on certain DVD releases of two of the most famous films starring Errol Flynn as a special feature arrangement designed to recreate that kind of filmgoing experience while the PBS series, "Matinee at the Bijou", presented the equivalent content. Some theaters ran on "continuous showings", where the same items would repeat throughout the day, with patrons arriving and departing at any time rather than having distinct entrance and exit cycles. Newsreels gradually became obsolete by the 1960s with the rise of television news, and most material now shown prior to a feature film is of a commercial or promotional nature (which usually include "trailers", which are advertisements for films and commercials for other consumer products or services).
A typical modern theater presents commercial advertising shorts, then movie trailers, and then the feature film. Advertised start times are usually for the entire program or session, not the feature itself; thus people who want to avoid commercials and/or trailers would opt to enter later. This is easiest and causes the least inconvenience when it is not crowded, and/or one is not very choosy about where one wants to sit. If one has a ticket for a specific seat (see below) one is formally assured of that, but it is still inconvenient and disturbing to find and claim it during the commercials and trailers, unless it is near an aisle.
Some movie theaters have some kind of break during the presentation, particularly for very long films. There may also be a break between the introductory material and the feature. Some countries such as the Netherlands have a tradition of incorporating an intermission in regular feature presentations, though many theaters have now abandoned that tradition, while in North America, this is very rare and usually limited to special circumstances involving extremely long movies.
During the closing credits many people leave, but some stay until the end. Usually the lights are switched on after the credits, sometimes already during them. Some films show mid-credits scenes while the credits are rolling, which in comedy films are often "bloopers" and outtakes, or post-credits scenes, which typically set up the audience for a sequel.
Until the multiplex era, prior to showtime, the screen in some theatres would be covered by a curtain, in the style of a theatre for a play. The curtain would be drawn for the feature. It is common practice in Australia for the curtain to cover part of the screen during advertising and trailers, then be fully drawn to reveal the full width of the screen for the main feature. Some theaters, lacking a curtain, filled the screen with slides of some form of abstract art prior to the start of the movie. Currently, in multiplexes, theater chains often feature a continuous slideshow between showings featuring a loop of movie trivia, promotional material for the theater chains (such as encouraging patrons to purchase drinks, snacks and popcorn, gift vouchers and group rates, or other foyer retail offers), or advertising for local and national businesses. Advertisements for Fandango and other convenient methods of purchasing tickets is often shown. Also prior to showing the film, reminders, in varying forms would be shown concerning theater etiquette (no smoking, no talking, no littering, removing crying babies, etc.) and in recent years, added reminders to silence mobile phones as well warning as concerning movie piracy with camcorders ("camming").
Some well-equipped theaters have "interlock" projectors which allow two or more projectors and sound units to be run in unison by connecting them electronically or mechanically. This set up can be used to project two prints in sync (for dual-projector 3-D) or to "interlock" one or more sound tracks to a single film. Sound interlocks were used for stereophonic sound systems before the advent of magnetic film prints. Fantasound (developed by RCA in 1940 for Disney's Fantasia) was an early interlock system. Likewise, early stereophonic films such as "This Is Cinerama" and "House of Wax" utilized a separate, magnetic oxide-coated film to reproduce up to six or more tracks of stereophonic sound.
Datasat Digital Entertainment, purchaser of DTS's cinema division in May 2008, uses a time code printed on and read off of the film to synchronize with a CD-ROM in the sound track, allowing multi-channel soundtracks or foreign language tracks. This is not considered a projector interlock, however.
This practice is most common with so-called blockbuster movies. Muvico Theaters, Regal Entertainment Group, Pacific Theatres and AMC Theatres are some theaters that interlock films.
Live broadcasting to movie theaters.
Sometimes movie theaters provide digital projection of a live broadcast of an opera, concert, or other performance or event. For example, there are regular live broadcasts to movie theaters of Metropolitan Opera performances, with additionally limited repeat showings.
Admission prices are often more than twice the regular movie theater admission prices.
Pricing and admission.
In order to obtain admission to a movie theater, the prospective theater-goer must usually purchase a ticket from the box office, which may be for an arbitrary seat ("open" or "free" seating, first-come, first-served) or for a specific one (allocated seating). As of 2015, some theaters sell tickets online or at automated kiosks in the theater lobby. Movie theaters in North America generally have open seating. Cinemas in Europe can have free seating or numbered seating. Some theaters in Mexico offer numbered seating, in particular, Cinepolis VIP. In the case of numbered seating systems the attendee can often pick seats from a video screen. Sometimes the attendee cannot see the screen and has to make a choice based on a verbal description of the still available seats. In the case of free seats, already seated customers may be asked by staff to move one or more places for the benefit of an arriving couple or group wanting to sit together.
For 2013, the average price for a movie ticket in the United States was $8.13. The price of a ticket may be discounted during off-peak times e.g. for matinees, and higher at busy times, typically evenings and/or weekends. In Australia, Canada and New Zealand, when this practice is used, it is traditional to offer the lower prices for Tuesday for all showings, one of the slowest days of the week in the movie theater business, which has led to the nickname "cheap Tuesday." Sometimes tickets are cheaper on Monday, or on Sunday morning. Almost all movie theaters employ economic price discrimination: tickets for youth, students, and seniors are typically cheaper. Large theater chains, such as AMC Theaters, also own smaller theaters that show "second runs" of popular films, at reduced ticket prices. Movie theaters in India and other developing countries employ price discrimination in seating arrangement: seats closer to the screen cost less, while the ones farthest from the screen cost more.
In the United States, many movie theater chains sell discounted passes, which can be exchanged for tickets to regular showings. These passes are traditionally sold in bulk to institutional customers and also to the general public at Bulktix.com. Some passes provide substantial discounts from the price of regular admission, especially if they carry restrictions. Common restrictions include a waiting period after a movie's release before the pass can be exchanged for a ticket or specific theaters where a pass is ineligible for admission.
Some movie theaters and chains sell monthly passes for unlimited entrance to regular showings. Even if the price is quoted per month the minimum duration may be several months, and when subscribing again after termination a one-time extra fee may be charged. Some examples:
Note that in Thailand there is the restriction of one viewing per movie, while in the Netherlands one can see any movie as many times as one wants as is the case with the Cineworld UK pass.
The increasing number of 3D movies, for which a fee is required, somewhat undermines the concept of unlimited entrance to regular showings, in particular if no 2D version is screened, except in the cases where 3D is included. Also, in one Pathé theater in the Netherlands on one day of the week buying a drink and a snack is compulsory.
Some adult theaters sell a day pass, either as standard ticket, or as an option that costs a little more than a single admission.
Also for some film festivals a pass is sold for unlimited entrance.
Luxury screens.
Some cinemas in city centers offer luxury seating with services like complimentary refills of soft drinks and popcorn, a bar serving beer, wine and liquor, reclining leather seats and service bells. Cinemas must have a liquor license to serve alcohol. The Vue Cinema chain is a good example of a large-scale offering of such a service, called "Gold Class" and similarly, ODEON, Britain's largest cinema chain, have gallery areas in some of their bigger cinemas where there is a separate foyer area with a bar and unlimited snacks.
Age restrictions.
Admission to a movie may also be restricted by a motion picture rating system, typically due to depictions of sex, nudity or graphic violence. According to such systems, children or teenagers below a certain age may be forbidden access to theaters showing certain movies, or only admitted when accompanied by a parent or other adult. In some jurisdictions, a rating may legally impose these age restrictions on movie theaters. Furthermore, where movie theaters do not have this legal obligation, they may enforce restrictions on their own. Accordingly, a movie theater may either not be allowed to program an unrated film, or voluntarily refrain from that.
Revenue.
Movie studios/film distributors in the U.S. traditionally drive hard bargains entitling them to as much as 100% of the gross ticket revenue during the first weeks (and then the balance changes in 10% increments in favor of exhibitors at intervals that vary from film to film). Film exhibition has seen a rise in its development with video consolidation as well as DVD sales, which over the past two decades is the biggest earner in revenue. According to The Contemporary Hollywood Film Industry, Philip Drake states that box office takings currently account for less than a quarter of total revenues and have become increasingly "front loaded," earning the majority of receipts in the opening two weeks of exhibition, meaning that films need to make an almost instant impact in order to avoid being dropped from screens by exhibitors. Essentially, if the film does not succeed in the first few weeks of its inception, it will most likely fail in its attempt to gain a sustainable amount of revenue and thus being taken out from movie theaters. Furthermore, higher-budget films on the "opening weekend," or the three days, Friday to Sunday, can signify how much revenue it will bring in, not only to America, but as well as overseas. It may also determine the price in distribution windows through home video and television.
In Canada, the total operating revenue in the movie theater industry was $1.7 billion in 2012, an 8.4% increase from 2010. This increase was mainly the result of growth in box office and concession revenue. Combined, these accounted for 91.9% of total industry operating revenue. In the US, the "...number of tickets sold fell nearly 11% between 2004 and 2013, according to the report, while box office revenue increased 17%" due to increased ticket prices.
New forms of competition.
One reason for the decline in ticket sales is that "home-entertainment options improving all the time— whether streamed movies and television, video games, or mobile apps—and studios releasing fewer movies", which means that "people are less likely to head to their local multiplex".
A Pew Media survey from 2006 found that the relationship between movies watched at home versus at the movie theater was in a five to one ratio and 75% of respondents said their preferred way of watching a movie was at home, versus 21% who said they preferred to go to a theater. In 2014, it was reported that the practice of releasing a film in theaters and via on-demand steaming on the same day (for selected films) and the rise in popularity of the Netflix streaming service has led to concerns in the movie theater industry. Another source of competition is television, which has "...stolen a lot of cinema's best tricks – like good production values and top tier actors – and brought them into people's living rooms." Since the 2010s, one of the increasing sources of competition for movie theaters is the increasing ownership by people of home theater systems which can display high-resolution Blu-ray disks of movies on large, widescreen flat-screen TVs, with 5.1 Surround Sound and a powerful subwoofer for low-pitched sounds.
Ticket price uniformity.
The relatively strong uniformity of movie ticket prices, particularly in the U.S., is a common economics puzzle, because conventional supply and demand theory would suggest higher prices for more popular and more expensive movies, and lower prices for an unpopular "bomb" or for a documentary with less audience appeal. Unlike seemingly similar forms of entertainment such as rock concerts, in which a popular performer's tickets cost much more than an unpopular performer's tickets, the demand for movies is very difficult to predict ahead of time. Indeed, some films with major stars, such as "Gigli" (which starred the then-supercouple of Ben Affleck and Jennifer Lopez), have turned out to be box-office bombs, while low-budget films with unknown actors have become smash hits (e.g., "The Blair Witch Project"). The demand for films is usually determined from ticket sale statistics after the movie is already out. Uniform pricing is therefore a strategy to cope with unpredictable demand. Historical and cultural factors are sometimes also cited.
Ticket check.
In some movie theater complexes, the theaters are arranged such that tickets are checked at the entrance into the entire plaza, rather than before each theater.
At a theater with a sold-out show there is often an additional ticket check, to make sure that everybody with a ticket for that show can find a seat.
The lobby may be before or after the ticket check.
Controversies.
You are not permitted to use any camera or recording equipment in this cinema. This will be treated as an attempt to breach copyright. Any person doing so can be ejected and such articles may be confiscated by the police. We ask the audience to be vigilant against any such activity and report any matters arousing suspicion to cinema staff. Thank you.
Intimacy.
Even prior to the invention of motion pictures, the darkened auditoriums of opera houses were associated with physical intimacy between couples, particularly in the expensive private boxes ("loges") in the balcony, which had curtains that could be drawn. Since the introduction of the movie theatre, this tradition continued. Some couples attend movies for the additional reason that the darkened auditorium provides the possibility of some kissing and physical intimacy (with additional privacy in the back row), i.e., the same amount of intimacy is a lesser form of public display of affection. This applies in particular for young people who still live with their parents, and whose parents tend to monitor and/or forbid certain activities, and in the case of other social or even legal problems with PDA. Compared with being together in a room without other people, it may also be reassuring for one or both of the couple (and for parents) that the intimacy is necessarily limited. Movie theatres have also been identified as one of the various locations in which "uncommitted, non-romantic sexual encounters" take place, with other locations including dance clubs, bars and parks.
Arm rests pose a hindrance to intimacy. Some theaters have "loveseats": seats designed for two, without an armrest in the middle. The most modern theaters have movable armrests throughout the theater that when down can hold a food container as well as act as an armrest or partition between the seats and when up allow closer contact between the couple. More expensive theaters may have large comfortable sofas. From an etiquette standpoint, "Cinemablend" states that a short kiss on the lips is almost always acceptable but to avoid disturbing other movie patrons, kissing should not go on beyond ten seconds; as well, couples who wish to kiss should try to sit at the back of the auditorium and choose a sparsely attended film.
Cinema and movie theater chains.
In North America, the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO) is the largest exhibition trade organization in the world. According to their figures, the top four chains represent almost half of the theater screens in North America. The top three chains in the U.S. are Regal Entertainment Group, AMC Entertainment Inc and Cinemark Theatres. In Canada, Cineplex Entertainment is the largest and movie theater company with 161 locations and 1,635 screens. In Mexico, the major chains are Cinepolis and Cinemex.
In the United States, the major chains include AMC Entertainment Inc - 5,206 screens in 346 theaters, Cinemark Theatres - 4,457 screens in 334 theaters, Landmark Theatres - 220 screens in 54 theaters, Marcus Theatres - 681 screens in 53 theaters.National Amusements - 409 screens in 32 theaters and Regal Entertainment Group - 7,334 screens in 588 cinemas.
Argentina chains include Hoyts, Village Cinemas, Cinemark and Showcase Cinemas. Brazilian chains include Cinemark and Moviecom. Chilean chains include Hoyts and Cinemark. Colombian, Costa Rican, Panaman and Peruvian chains include Cinemark and Cinépolis.
A major Chinese chain is UA Cinemas. Hong Kong has AMC Theatres. In India, PVR Cinemas is a leading cinema operating a chain of 500 screens and CineMAX and INOX are both multiplex chains. Indonesia has the 21 Cineplex chain. A major Israel theater is Cinema City International. Japanese chains include Toho and Shochiku. Europe is served by AMC, Cineworld and Odeon. A large chain in Australia is Event Cinemas in Sydney, NSW. In Africa, Ster-Kinekor has the largest market share in South Africa. Nu Metro Cinemas is another cinema chain in South Africa.

</doc>
<doc id="77822" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77822" title="Charles the Simple">
Charles the Simple

Charles III (17 September 879 – 7 October 929), called the Simple or the Straightforward (from the Latin "Carolus Simplex"), was the King of Western Francia from 898 until 922 and the King of Lotharingia from 911 until 919–23. He was a member of the Carolingian dynasty.
Early life.
Charles was the third and posthumous son of Louis the Stammerer by his second wife, Adelaide of Paris. As a child, Charles was prevented from succeeding to the throne at the time of the death in 884 of his half-brother Carloman. The nobles of the realm instead asked his cousin, Charles the Fat, to rule them. He was also prevented from succeeding the unpopular Charles, who was deposed in November 887 and died in January 888, although it is unknown if his deposition was accepted or even made known in West Francia before his death. The nobility elected as king Odo, the hero of the Siege of Paris, though there was a faction that supported Guy III of Spoleto. Charles was put under the protection of Ranulf II, the Duke of Aquitaine, who may have tried to claim the throne for him and in the end used the royal title himself until making peace with Odo.
King of Western Francia.
Finally, in 893 Charles was crowned by a faction opposed to Odo at Reims Cathedral, though he only became the effectual monarch with the death of Odo in 898.
In 911, a group of Vikings led by Rollo besieged Paris and Chartres. After a victory near Chartres on 26 August, Charles decided to negotiate with Rollo, resulting in the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte. For the Vikings' loyalty, they were granted all the land between the river Epte and the sea, as well as Brittany, which at the time was an independent country which France had unsuccessfully tried to conquer. Rollo also agreed to be baptised and to marry Charles' daughter, Gisela. 
Also in 911, Louis the Child, the King of Germany, died, and the nobles of Lotharingia, who had been loyal to him, under the leadership of Reginar Longneck declared Charles their new king, breaking from Germans who had elected Conrad of Franconia king. Charles had tried to win their support for years, for instance by marrying in April 907 a Lotharingian woman named Frederuna, and in 909, his niece Cunigunda married Wigeric of Lotharingia. He also defended the country against two attacks by Conrad, King of the Germans. Queen Frederuna died on 10 February 917 leaving six daughters and no sons, so the succession was uncertain. On 7 October 919 Charles married again to Eadgifu, the daughter of Edward the Elder, King of England, who bore his son, the future King Louis IV of France. By this time Charles' excessive favouritism towards a certain Hagano had turned the aristocracy against him. He endowed Hagano with monasteries that were already the benefices of other barons, alienating them. In Lotharingia he earned the enmity of the new duke, Gilbert, who declared for the German king Henry the Fowler in 919. Opposition to Charles in Lotharingia was not universal, however; he retained the support of Wigeric.
Revolt of the nobles.
The nobles, completely exasperated with Charles' policies and especially his favoritism of count Hagano, seized Charles in 920. But after negotiations by Archbishop Herveus of Reims the king was released.
In 922 the Frankish nobles revolted again led by Robert of Neustria. Robert, who was Odo's brother, was elected king by the rebels and crowned in opposition to Charles, who had to flee to Lotharingia. On 2 July 922, Charles lost his most faithful supporter, Herveus of Reims, who had succeeded Fulk in 900. Charles returned with a Norman army in 923 but was defeated on 15 June near Soissons by Robert, who died in the battle. Charles was captured and imprisoned in a castle at Péronne under the guard of Herbert II of Vermandois. Robert's son-in-law Rudolph of Burgundy was elected to succeed him. In 925 the Lotharingians were subsumed into the Kingdom of Germany. Charles died in prison on 7 October 929 and was buried at the nearby abbey of Saint-Fursy. His son by Eadgifu would eventually be crowned in 936 as Louis IV of France. In the initial aftermath of Charles's defeat, Eadgifu and children had fled to England.
Family.
Charles married first, in May 907, Frederuna, daughter of Dietrich, Count in the Hamaland. Together they had six daughters:
Charles married secondly, in 919, Eadgifu of Wessex. Together they had one son:
Charles also had several bastard offspring:
References.
<br>
<br>

</doc>
<doc id="77825" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77825" title="TNT (TV channel)">
TNT (TV channel)

Turner Network Television (often abbreviated TNT) is an American basic cable and satellite television channel that is owned by the Turner Broadcasting System division of Time Warner. The channel's programming consists of television series and feature films, with a focus on dramatic programming, along with some professional sporting events (such as NBA basketball games and PGA golf).
As of July 2015, TNT is available to approximately 94.259 million cable, satellite and telco households (81.0% of households with at least one television set) in the United States.
History.
Beginnings.
Turner Network Television launched at 8 p.m. Eastern Time on October 3, 1988 with "The Star Spangled Banner" (specifically a tape of the performance that had started sister channel CNN 8 years before); its inaugural telecast was the 1939 classic film "Gone with the Wind", to which TNT founder Ted Turner had acquired the rights. The movie was chosen as the channel's first program because, it was said that "Gone with the Wind" was Turner's favorite movie (it would also serve as the first program aired on sister channel Turner Classic Movies, when it debuted in April 1994). Incidentally, "Gone With the Wind" had its premiere held in Atlanta, Georgia – Turner's hometown and the headquarters of the channel's corporate parent, Turner Broadcasting System – and the city served as the setting for the film.
TNT was, at least initially, a vehicle for older movies and television shows, but slowly began to add original programming and newer reruns. When TNT began broadcasting older film releases from the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer library (which was acquired by Turner as a result of his sale of the MGM film studio to Kirk Kerkorian, from whom Turner had purchased the studio less than a year before, in October 1986 due to debt concerns over Turner Entertainment's corporate debt load, effectively giving the company rights to MGM's extensive array of films and television programs made prior to the sale), the channel caused controversy due to its airings of colorized versions of many classics that were originally filmed in black-and-white.
Prior to the launch of the channel in 1988, the name had been utilized by Turner Broadcasting as a syndication service for various sporting events, including two exhibition games from 1982 organized by the NFL Players Association during the NFL strike of that year, and the first Goodwill Games (which were organized by Turner himself) in 1986.
Expansion.
In 1995, TNT debuted "WCW Monday Nitro", which assumed the distinction as the flagship program of the now-defunct World Championship Wrestling from "WCW Saturday Night", which debuted on sister channel TBS in 1992 and ran on that channel until 2000. At one point, "Monday Nitro" was regularly the highest-rated weekly program on cable television; the program beat "Monday Night Raw", the flagship show of the World Wrestling Federation (now the WWE or World Wrestling Entertainment), in the ratings for 83 consecutive weeks from 1996 to 1998.
The channel was also known for its late night programming; one such program was "MonsterVision", a Saturday night B movie showcase that aired from 1993 to 2000 (and featured a "Godzilla" movie marathon at the end of every month). Penn & Teller served as occasional guest hosts during its early years; in 1997, "MonsterVision" found a permanent host in cult personality and drive-in movie aficionado Joe Bob Briggs – the pseudonym of actor and film critic John Irving Bloom – who hosted a pair of horror films each week, such as "Friday the 13th Part 2" and "Wes Craven's New Nightmare". During the wraparound segments within each film, Briggs provided a running commentary, trivia, off-color jokes, and a drive-in total (in the manner as those seen on a similar B movie showcase that Briggs hosted on The Movie Channel from 1986 to 1996, "Joe Bob Briggs' Drive-In Theater"), as well as jokes at the expense of TNT's Standards & Practices department regarding the heavy censorship of the featured movies (which contrasted with "Drive-In Theater", which, since The Movie Channel is a premium service, aired films with more risque content than that allowed by TNT, as well as a wider variety of B movies). This running joke culminated in a "Friday the 13th" all-night Halloween marathon in 1998, where it was implied that Ted Turner was out to kill him.
Until 1998, TNT also aired cartoons from the Turner library (such as "The Flintstones", "Scooby-Doo", the DePatie-Freleng "Pink Panther" cartoons, "Dexter's Laboratory", and "The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest") as part of a daily block called "TNT Toons". "The Rudy and Gogo World Famous Cartoon Show", which ran from 1995 to 1997, was an original children's program on the channel featuring classic Warner Bros., MGM, and Popeye shorts, hosted by a titular pair of a marionette and a nanny goat. In 1998, TNT (and TBS) dropped all of its remaining cartoons, relegating those shows to Cartoon Network; most of the animated series and shorts that were dropped would also serve as the core of Boomerang, a new cable channel devoted to classic cartoons that launched on April 1, 2000.
During the 1990s, TNT scheduled a lineup of shows on weekday afternoons that included "Due South", ', ' and "Babylon 5". In 1998, TNT took over production of the fifth and final season of "Babylon 5" from the Prime Time Entertainment Network, after the ad-hoc syndication block ceased operations; the following year, TNT produced the "Babylon 5" spinoff series "Crusade", which was canceled after 13 episodes, after TNT management decided that science fiction did not fit the channel's brand identity. In 2001, TNT debuted its then most successful original series, "Witchblade", which ran for two seasons, ending in 2002.
Shift towards drama.
On June 12, 2001, TNT underwent an extensive rebrand, with the introduction of a new logo (designed by Trollbäck + Company) and a new slogan, "We Know Drama", which emphasized the channel's new focus on dramatic programming, including sports and off-network syndicated dramas such as "Law & Order", "NYPD Blue", "ER" and "Judging Amy". As the decade went on, the channel's format became a direct contrast to sister network TBS, which had focused on a wider variety of programming initially but moved toward and now focuses largely on comedic series and films, and by extension Cartoon Network, which showed exclusively animated programming at the time (that channel still has a predominately animated schedule). In addition, NASCAR coverage moved to TNT from TBS starting with the 2001 season, as Turner Broadcasting System management believed that it would fit more with TNT's new format than TBS.
On January 1, 2003, TNT launched a substitute feed called "TNT Plus", although it does not appear this was ever reflected in the channel's on-air identity. The apparent sole purpose of its establishment was to force renegotiations with cable and satellite providers to increase carriage fees to help pay for TNT's new NBA and NASCAR contracts, well before the channel's distribution agreements with providers were scheduled to come up for renewal. In theory, TNT Plus was to have been the sole carrier of Turner's NBA and NASCAR coverage from that point forward, while any providers still carrying the original TNT would have seen replacement programming instead. Although it appears that Comcast did not immediately sign on to carry TNT Plus, there is no evidence that Turner had actually pulled its sports programming from the "original" TNT.
On December 7, 2008, TNT unveiled an update to its logo, displaying it mainly in a silver (shown on-screen during programming and on the TNT website) or sometimes gold beveling. The "We Know Drama" tagline remained, but the channel added more of a focus on its original series and announced plans to carry three nights a week of original programming during primetime starting in 2009. In 2012, TNT rebranded itself with a new slogan: "Drama, Period." (visually displayed as "Drama.," with the TNT logo serving as the period symbol), with the logo being simply recolored to match the themes of its shows.
On May 14, 2014, TNT altered its on-air branding to "TNT Drama" and introduced a new slogan, "Boom". The branding campaign reflects the channel's refocusing towards action-adventure, sci-fi/fantasy and mystery/suspense series alongside its slate of crime dramas. The channel purchased basic cable rights in September for the next five Marvel Studios movies starting with "". In 2016, TNT changed its logo in order to catch up with sister channel TBS as they also rebranded their logo on October 31st, 2015, earlier than TNT did.
Programming.
TNT currently airs a mix of original drama and reality series, and reruns of dramas that originally aired on the major broadcast networks. Original programs currently seen on TNT include "Rizzoli & Isles", "Major Crimes", "The Librarians", "Boston's Finest", "Murder in the First", and "The Last Ship". The channel's daytime, overnight and Saturday morning schedule is heavily dominated by reruns of current and former network police procedural series, while its weekday morning schedule focuses on sci-fi/supernatural/fantasy series. Such programs include "Castle", "Bones", "Supernatural" and TNT mainstay "Law & Order".
Movies.
Feature films have been a mainstay of TNT since its inception. TNT maintains movie licensing agreements with sister company Warner Bros. Entertainment (primarily releases from Warner Bros. Pictures and New Line Cinema), Touchstone Pictures, Columbia Pictures, 20th Century Fox, Universal Pictures and Paramount Pictures.
Since the launch of Turner Classic Movies, TNT's movie lineup has shifted away from classic films (outside of special airings of films such as "The Wizard of Oz", which is shown on the channel each November around Thanksgiving weekend), in favor of more recent films released from the 1980s onward, with an emphasis on films released after 1995. Presently, most of the films broadcast on TNT are of the drama and action genres, however some comedic films continue to air on the channel periodically. Movies generally air on the channel during the overnight hours on most nights and for much of the day on weekends (except from 3:00 to 8:00 a.m. Eastern Time on Saturday and Sunday mornings and 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Eastern on Saturdays – with the end time subject to variation – due to blocks of drama series reruns that typically air in those timeslots).
Beginning in 1997, TNT broadcast a 24-hour marathon of the 1983 comedy film "A Christmas Story" from the evening of Christmas Eve to the evening of Christmas Day; the marathon ran simultaneously on sister channel TBS until 2009, when the annual event became exclusive to that channel. However, as of 2014, TNT has begun airing the movie for 24 hours once again. Once each weekend, TNT airs a movie in primetime with limited commercial interruption, branded in on-air promos under the title "More Movies, Less Commercials" (sister channel TBS also runs a primetime movie with limited commercial interruption each weekend).
Sports.
Torneo Federal A (Federal A Tournament of AFA).
In 2003, TNT obtained partial televisión televisión rights exclusive to the Torneo Argentino A, Argentina Tercera División in Interior Zone called "El Partido del Domingo En Vivo" (The Sunday Match Live) (Except Argentina) are broadcast live Sunday at 11:00 am (local time) on TNT Latin América and Brazil.
NFL football.
In 1990, TNT obtained partial television rights to the National Football League (NFL)'s "Sunday Night Football" package, in a comprehensive agreement in which games were split with ESPN. The "NFL on TNT" consisted of three or four preseason game broadcasts and telecasts of regular season games during the first half of each season; which it retained until 1997. Abiding by NFL broadcasting rules, TNT distributed its game telecasts to broadcast television stations in the local markets of the teams playing in that week's game.
NBA basketball.
TNT obtained partial cable television rights to the National Basketball Association (NBA) in . From that point on, TNT shared broadcast rights with TBS, which initially only aired game telecasts from the Atlanta Hawks (which Turner had purchased from developer Tom Cousins in 1985, as part of a deal that also included the sale of the Omni International Hotel, which was converted to serve as the headquarters for sister channel CNN), before expanding its NBA coverage to include games from other teams within the league. In the early 1990s, some Hawks game telecasts shown on TNT and TBS became subject to blackout within 35 miles of the home team's arena; this restriction was dropped in 2000, allowing TNT the right to be the exclusive broadcaster of any game it chose to carry.
TNT had regularly broadcast NBA games on multiple Tuesday nights until the ; the weekly telecasts were then moved to Thursday nights in , when TBS was opted out of rights to NBA coverage as a result of the league's contract renewal with Turner Sports. In addition to carrying NBA regular season games (which typically air as a doubleheader on most weeks), TNT also airs opening night games, the NBA All-Star Game, and the vast majority of games within the conference playoffs and one of the Conference Finals (the Eastern Conference Finals in odd-number years and the Western Conference Finals in even-number years) under the "NBA on TNT" branding.
College basketball.
In 2011, TNT obtained a share in the television rights to the NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship, as part of a comprehensive broadcast rights deal known as "NCAA March Madness". The deal also involves CBS and fellow Turner properties TBS and TruTV. TNT and the other two Turner-owned channels involved in the deal presently each hold partial rights to games played in the second and third rounds of the tournament (CBS and TBS will alternate coverage of the regional semifinals, regional finals, the Final Four and national championship game beginning in 2016).
NASCAR.
In 2001, TNT assumed the partial cable television rights to select Winston Cup and Busch Series races as part of a deal between NASCAR, NBC and TNT. Turner Broadcasting initially planned to have TBS serve as the cable partner during negotiations, which would have allowed it to retain rights to NASCAR events, but decided that the NASCAR telecasts would better fit TNT's "We Know Drama" image campaign. TNT retained NASCAR rights after NBC chose not to renew its broadcast contract following the 2006 NASCAR season; the channel's broadcasting agreement with the organization ended in 2014, as a result of a television deal with NBC effective that year, which gave it rights to the last 20 races of the 2014-15 NASCAR Sprint Cup season as well as rights to Sprint Cup events through 2025 (with NBCSN serving as its cable partner). The last race broadcast by TNT was the Camping World RV Sales 301 on July 13, 2014.
PGA golf.
TNT televises the PGA Championship, carrying full coverage of the first two rounds and early coverage of the weekend rounds. The rights have been held since 1999, and the current contract with the PGA of America is through 2019.
In 2003, TNT took over the rights to broadcast the Thursday and Friday rounds of The Open Championship, as well as the rights to the Women's British Open and Senior British Open (with ABC carrying coverage of the weekend rounds); ESPN assumed the Open Championship rights in 2009. From 2000 to 2007, TNT also carried the biennial PGA Tour-managed Presidents Cup; the television rights were assumed by Golf Channel beginning with the 2009 event as part of its overall cable deal with the PGA Tour.
List of programs broadcast by TNT.
Current programming.
Sports programming.
TNT, through the Turner Sports division of parent company Turner Broadcasting System, holds the broadcast rights to the following sports telecasts:
Former programming.
Acquired programming.
Most of these programs have since moved to sister channels Cartoon Network or Boomerang, or were aired simultaneously on the former during their TNT runs.
International.
European, Australian, Latin American, Spanish and Asian versions of TNT were launched in the 1990s, which were exclusively dedicated to movies, mainly from the MGM and Warner Bros. archives (however, the U.K. and Scandinavian versions of TNT both broadcast "WCW Monday Nitro" on Friday nights on a four-day delay from its U.S. broadcast, and the Latin American version aired a children's block called "Magic Box"). The European, Australian and Asian versions of TNT shared channel space with Cartoon Network, while the Latin American version shared space with CNN International. The EMEA, Asian and Australasian TNT channels were eventually relaunched as Turner Classic Movies, while the Latin American version retained the TNT branding. The most well-known TNT channel in Europe was (and still is) the French version, which used similar graphics to what the flagship U.S. channel was using at the time.
Latin America.
Regional versions of TNT were launched in Brazil and Latin America in 1991; the channel mostly shows films, along with a few series. All programs used to be presented subbed in Spanish and Portuguese, until 2015, when the channel reverted it and made available the dubs; however, the channel also offers closed captions (which can be removed or placed by the user) on digital operators. TNT Latin America and TNT Brazil began operating high definition simulcast feeds in 2009.
Feeds
Germany.
In January 2009, a version of TNT launched in Germany as TNT Serie. The channel shows a wide variety of older and recent American drama and comedy programs (such as "30 Rock", "Murder, She Wrote", "Monk", "Six Feet Under", "Seinfeld", "ER", "The King of Queens", "Everybody Loves Raymond", "Boardwalk Empire", "Game of Thrones" and "Falling Skies"). TNT Serie maintains two audio channels: one with the original English language audio track and one with a German-dubbed soundtrack. In June 2009, the German version of TCM was relaunched as TNT Film. TNT Serie and TNT Film both launched high definition simulcast feeds in the fall of 2010.
Spain.
The TNT brand returned to the Spanish market in the summer of 2007, when it launched exclusively on pay television platform Digital+. , TNT is available on several cable providers in Spain. TNT España is divided in two blocks: one exclusively carrying movies and another exclusively carrying television series (such as "The Vampire Diaries", "The Big Bang Theory", "Two and a Half Men", "Falling Skies" and "Sherlock"). TNT España was the first channel which produced a television series for a pay/cable channel in Spain.
Turkey.
A local version of TNT in Turkey launched on March 3, 2008 by Doğan Media Group as a channel focusing on feature films. Foreign television series and movies were eventually added to the channel's schedule. On January 24, 2011, it was relaunched as a general entertainment channel with the addition of new television series to its lineup. In 2012, TNT was rebranded as tv2.
Scandinavia.
The Scandinavian TNT channel was originally launched by tabloid newspaper Aftonbladet as "Aftonbladet TV7" on October 9, 2006. Aftonbladet sold the channel in late 2007. In August 2008, it was sold once again to NonStop Television. On March 2, 2011, the channel was relaunched as TNT7, following the Turner Broadcasting System's purchase of NonStop Television owner Millennium Media Group. On March 21, 2012, the channel was renamed TNT, dropping the "7" from the name.
Netherlands and Flanders.
On April 10, 2012, TNT HD Benelux launched in Belgium, carried exclusively on Telenet. The first month of the service was offered to consumers for free, with a subscription required thereafter to view the channel. TNT HD Benelux offers a mix of comedies, movies and current television series (such as "Falling Skies", "Shameless" and "Memphis Beat"), as well as reruns of older series (such as "ER", "The West Wing" and "Smallville"). The channel launched in the Netherlands on January 24, 2013; however, it was dropped by pay television providers in that country on January 1, 2014.

</doc>
<doc id="77826" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77826" title="USA Network">
USA Network

USA Network (commonly referred to as simply "USA") is an American basic cable and satellite television channel that is owned by the NBCUniversal Cable division of NBCUniversal, itself a subsidiary of Comcast. Once a minor player in basic cable, the network has steadily gained popularity due to its original programming; USA also broadcasts syndicated reruns of current and former "network television" (i.e., broadcast) series and theatrically-released feature films, as well as limited sports programming.
As of July 2015, USA Network is available to approximately 95.567 million pay television households (82.1% of households with at least one television set) in the United States.
History.
Paramount and Universal ownership.
USA Network originally launched on September 22, 1977 as the Madison Square Garden Network (not to be confused with the New York City regional sports network of the same name). The network was founded by cable provider UA-Columbia Cablevision and Kay Koplovitz. The channel was one of the first national cable television channels, using satellite delivery as opposed to microwave relay to distribute its programming to cable systems. Initially, the network ran a mix of college and less well-known professional sports, similar to those found during the early years of ESPN. The channel began its broadcast day after 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time on weekdays and 12:00 p.m. Eastern Time on weekends.
On April 9, 1980, the channel changed its name to USA Network after the ownership structure was reorganized under a joint operating agreement by UA-Columbia and the then-MCA Inc./Universal City Studios. That fall, USA began signing on at 12:00 p.m. Eastern Time on weekdays; it also added some talk shows and a children's program called "Calliope" to its schedule. Sports programming began airing at 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time weekdays, and aired all day on weekends. In the fall of 1981, USA began its daily programming at 6:00 a.m. Eastern Time, with talk shows and children's programs running until 12:00 p.m., sports airing from 12:00 p.m. onward during weekends and until 3:00 p.m. weekdays, talk shows from 3:00 to 6:00 p.m. weekdays, and sports airing again after 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time.
Later, in 1982, Time Inc. and Gulf+Western's Paramount Pictures unit (now part of Viacom) would buy stakes in the venture. The three partners had a non-compete clause that would prevent them from owning other basic cable networks independently from the USA joint venture. Said clause would cause Time Inc. to drop out of the venture in 1987, as the company attempted to buy CNN from Ted Turner and run it independently from USA. MCA/Paramount subsequently became the sole owners of the channel (with each company owning a 50% interest). In the fall of 1982, USA began operating on a 24-hour-a-day schedule, running a mix of talk shows, a children's program, and a low-budget movie from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time. The channel began running a mix of 1960s and 1970s Hanna-Barbera cartoons each weekday evening from 6:00 to 7:00 p.m. as part of the "USA Cartoon Express" block, with sports programming airing after 7:00 p.m., which were rebroadcast during the overnight hours. Weekends featured a mix of movies, some older drama series and talk shows during the morning hours, and sports during the afternoons and evenings. Overnights consisted of old low-budget films and film shorts, and music as part of a show called "Night Flight".
Between 1984 and 1986, USA began shifting away from sports programming, and began focusing on general entertainment programs not found on broadcast stations, including some less common network drama series and cartoons.
One tradition on USA was an afternoon lineup of game show reruns mixed in with several original low-budget productions that aired over the years. It began in October 1984 with reruns of "The Gong Show" and "Make Me Laugh". In September 1985, the network began airing a revival of the mid-1970s game show "Jackpot"; two more original game shows, "Love Me, Love Me Not" and a revival of the short-lived 1980 series "Chain Reaction", were added in September 1986. More shows were progressively added soon afterward such as "The Joker's Wild", "Tic-Tac-Dough", "Press Your Luck", "High Rollers" and "Hollywood Squares" (with John Davidson), along with "Wipeout", "Face the Music" and "Name That Tune". In June 1987, the channel debuted another original game show, "Bumper Stumpers". When it began, the game show block ran for an hour, but expanded significantly the following year. By 1989, the network ran game shows Monday through Fridays from 12:00 to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time.
In January 1989, USA debuted "USA Up All Night", a showcase of low-budget feature films that aired as part of its weekend overnight schedule. "Up All Night" became a cult favorite among viewers for the comedic wraparound segments that were usually shown during breaks leading into (and sometimes, out of) commercials and between films that were hosted by comedian Gilbert Gottfried and model/actress Rhonda Shear (the latter of whom replaced original co-host Caroline Schlitt in 1991); the program was discontinued in March 7, 1998, however late night movie telecasts on USA continued to be branded under the "Up All Night" banner until 2002.
Short news updates, branded as "USA Updates", were shown from as early as 1989 until 2000. These segments were first produced out of KYW-TV in Philadelphia, owing to the fact that the station had already produced a number of syndicated news services (including the Group W Newsfeed) and Steve Bell, the former newsreader on "Good Morning America", was employed as a primary anchor at the station. However, when KYW's news operations were heavily revamped in response to falling ratings in 1991, production of USA Updates was then taken over by the All News Channel (operated by Hubbard Broadcasting and Viacom's joint venture, CONUS Communications). The ANC-produced updates continued through 2000 (ANC was suffering heavily around this time due to competition with other cable news channels such as CNN and the then-similarly formatted Headline News, and ended up shutting down in 2002); USA Network has not carried any news programming since the news updates were discontinued.
The tradition of game show reruns continued into the 1990s with the "$25,000 and $100,000 Pyramids", the early 1990s revivals of "The Joker's Wild" and "Tic-Tac-Dough" as well as other well-known shows such as "Scrabble", "Sale of the Century", "Talk About" and "Caesars Challenge". Additionally, two more original game shows were added in June 1994: "Free 4 All" and "Quicksilver". In September 1991, the block was reduced to three hours, from 2:00 to 5:00 p.m. Eastern. However, an additional hour was added in March 1993. In November 1994, the game show block was cut back to only two hours, from 2:00 to 4:00 p.m. On September 24, 1992, USA launched a sister network, the Sci-Fi Channel (now Syfy), focusing on science fiction series and films. In September 1993, USA adopted a new on air look centering on the slogan "The Remote Stops Here", with flat graphics suggesting a television camera's in-lens symbols and music consisting of electric guitar and synthesized noises (though the movie presentation openers were retained from the previous look).
USA Networks ownership.
In 1994, Paramount Pictures parent Paramount Communications was sold to Viacom; the following year, MCA was acquired by Seagram. In April 1996, Viacom, which also owned MTV Networks, launched a new classic television network called TV Land. MCA subsequently sued Viacom for breach of contract, claiming that it had violated the non-compete clause in its joint venture agreement with MCA. A judge presiding over the case sided with MCA, and Viacom subsequently sold its stake in USA and the Sci-Fi Channel to Seagram for $1.7 billion. In turn, Seagram sold a controlling interest in the networks to Barry Diller in February 1998, which led to the creation of USA Networks, Inc.; the company also merged the cable channels with Diller's existing television properties including the Home Shopping Network and its broadcasting unit Silver King Broadcasting (which was restructured as USA Broadcasting, and eventually sold its stations to Univision Communications in 2001 to form the nucleus of Telefutura).
In October 1995, the network dropped the entire game show block; it was replaced with a block called "USA Live", which carried reruns of "Love Connection" and "The People's Court", with live hosted wraparound segments between shows; that block was dropped by 1997 (some of the game shows that USA had aired can still be seen on GSN). In 1994, USA began simulcasting the upstart business news channel Bloomberg Information TV each weekday morning from 5:00 to 8:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific Time (and later, from 5:00 to 6:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific on Saturdays); in 2004, the Bloomberg simulcast moved to E!, where it ran until 2007 (USA was actually the second television network to simulcast Bloomberg's programming, the now-defunct American Independent Network also carried a simulcast of the channel during the mid-1990s).
In July 1996, the network unveiled a new on-air appearance, which included the introduction of a new logo (incorporating a star ridged into the "U" of the now-serifed "USA" logotype), and a three-note jingle. Network IDs, feature presentation intros for movies and promo graphics were based around a behind-the-scenes look at the fictional "USA Studios"; some of the IDs showed people in the control room, while a studio that was being set-up by a crew was the backdrop for the "Tonight" menu that displayed the evening's schedule. Opening sequences leading into movie telecasts showed people running through the "USA Studios Film Vault". The new look coincided with a shift in focus, more towards off-network reruns and original programming; game shows and court shows were dropped from the schedule, while cartoons were phased out. USA Studios also became the branding for USA-produced programming at this point.
In September 1996, USA replaced the "USA Cartoon Express" with the action-oriented children's block, "USA Action Extreme Team"; the channel discontinued its animation block outright in September 1998 (other than airing the first-run teen sitcom "USA High" and reruns of "" from 1997 to 2001, USA has not aired children's programming since that time), and replaced it with a block called "USAM", which advertised itself as "Primetime Comedy in the Morning". The block mainly featured sitcoms originally aired on network television that were cancelled before making it to 100 episodes (such as "The Jeff Foxworthy Show", "Hearts Afire" and "Something So Right"); however, for a time, the block also included the 1989–1994 episodes of the Bob Saget run of "America's Funniest Home Videos". "USAM" was discontinued in 2001; by that point, the only sitcoms airing on USA were daytime and late night reruns of "Martin" and overnight airings of "Living Single", "Cheers" and "Wings", with drama series and movies populating much of the channel's daytime and primetime schedule.
In 2000, USA Networks bought Canadian media company North American Television, Inc. (a joint partnership between the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and Power Corporation of Canada), owner of cable television channels Trio and Newsworld International (the CBC continued to handle programming responsibilities for NWI until 2005, when eventual USA owner Vivendi sold the channel to a group led by Al Gore, who relaunched it as Current TV).
Vivendi ownership.
In 2001, USA Networks sold its non-shopping television and film assets (including USA Network, the Sci-Fi Channel, Trio, USA Films (which was rechristened as Focus Features) and Studios USA) to Vivendi Universal. USA and the other channels were folded into Vivendi's Universal Television Group.
In November 2002, the channel debuted "Monk", which became one of USA Network's first breakout hit series. It is the comedy-drama police procedural that starred Tony Shalhoub as Adrian Monk, a former San Francisco police inspector-turned-consultant who suffers from various obsessive-compulsive behaviors that include the ability to pay attention to detail when solving crimes. It ran for eight seasons until it ended on December 4, 2009.
NBCUniversal/Comcast ownership.
In 2003, General Electric agreed to merge NBC and its sibling companies with Vivendi Universal's North American-based filmed entertainment assets, including Universal Pictures and Universal Television Group in a multibillion-dollar purchase, renaming the merged company NBC Universal. GE retained an 80% ownership stake in the new company, while Vivendi retained a 20% stake. NBC Universal officially took over as owner of USA and its sibling cable channels (except for Newsworld International) in 2004. That year, USA premiered the sci-fi series "The 4400". In 2006, USA premiered "Psych", a comedy-drama focusing on Shawn Spencer (James Roday), a man with a photographic memory and learned observational skills who claims he is psychic after being falsely accused as an accomplice in a series of murders and opens up a detective agency with childhood friend Burton Guster (Dulé Hill) as an unwitting partner; the series ran for eight seasons (becoming the network's longest-running series) until it ended in March 2014.
On May 13, 2007 (in advance of NBC's 2007–08 fall upfronts presentation), NBC Universal announced that new episodes of "" would be moved to USA beginning with the drama's seventh season in the fall of 2007; episodes would then be re-aired later in the season on NBC, most likely to shore up any programming holes created by the cancellation of a failed new series. Although this is not the first time a broadcast series has moved to cable (USA had acquired first-run rights to the revival of "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" from NBC in 1987, while "The Paper Chase" had moved beforehand from CBS to Showtime in 1983), it marked the first time that a series which moved its first-run episodes from broadcast to cable television would continue to air episodes on a broadcast network while it was still a first-run program. On December 7, 2007, it was announced that USA Network would continue broadcasting first-run episodes of "WWE Raw" until 2010. The USA original series "Burn Notice", starring Jeffrey Donovan as Michael Westen, a dismissed spy who becomes an unlicensed private investigator, also made its debut in 2007.
In 2008, USA announced a new original series "In Plain Sight", starring Mary McCormack, focusing on a United States Marshal working for the Witness Protection Program. The series debuted on June 1 of that year, and became USA's highest-rated series premiere since the 2006 debut of "Psych", with 5.3 million viewers.
In early 2009, USA Network acquired the network television rights for 24 recent and upcoming Universal Pictures films for $200 million. Among the films included in the deal were "Milk", "Frost/Nixon", "Duplicity", "State of Play", "Land of the Lost" and "Funny People". By January 2009, the highest-rated drama on USA Network was "House" (a standing that remains to this day, particularly in regards to the channel's acquired programs) surpassing both "" and "Law & Order: Criminal Intent", along with "In Plain Sight", "Monk" and "NCIS".
In 2010, USA Network, which had been airing its original series on Friday and Sunday evenings for several years, began to move its original series earlier into the work week. After the 2009–10 season break, "Burn Notice" resumed airing the remainder of its third season on Thursdays in the spring of 2010; "White Collar" moved to Tuesdays for the second half of its first season, while "Psych" moved from its longtime Friday night slot to Wednesdays.
In 2011, control and majority ownership of then-parent NBCUniversal passed from General Electric to Comcast. Comcast would buy out GE's remaining ownership in NBCU two years later.
On April 14, 2016, USA Network unveiled a new slogan,"We The Bold". The new slogan "encapsulates the network’s evolved programming strategy and telegraphs a new, distinct point of view for the brand. Building upon USA’s rich characters-driven history, “We The Bold” reflects the values and interests of today’s modern audiences by evoking courage, resiliency, risk-taking and authenticity." The initial ad campaign for the new slogan was revealed "via three content pieces, told from the point of view of USA characters “Elliot Alderson” (Rami Malek) of MR. ROBOT, “Katie Bowman” (Sarah Wayne Callies) of COLONY, and WWE Superstar Roman Reigns. All three spots organically feature “We the Bold” within the context of each franchisee’s world." [http://www.nbcumv.com/news/usa-network-unveils-new-tagline-and-brand-positioning-%E2%80%98we-bold%E2%80%99?network=33145]
Programming.
USA Network has achieved a viewership foothold with its original programming; this began in the 1990s with initial hits such as "Silk Stalkings" and "La Femme Nikita", which were gradually followed in the following two decades by series such as "Monk", "Psych", "White Collar", "Suits", "Burn Notice" and "Royal Pains". Most of its original series are scripted dramas, some of which incorporate comedic elements.
In addition to its original productions, the network airs syndicated reruns of current and former network series such as "", "Law & Order: Criminal Intent" (which spent the final four seasons of its run as a first-run program on USA) and "NCIS". The network also broadcasts a variety of films from the Universal Studios library and select films from other movie studios (such as Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and Warner Bros. Entertainment), airing primarily as part of its overnight and weekend schedule, and occasionally during primetime on nights when original programming or marathons of its acquired programs are not scheduled.
Since 1984, the network had been the longtime home of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show (until 2016). USA is also the home of World Wrestling Entertainment's flagship cable program "Raw"; the series originally aired on the channel from its debut in January 1993 (when the promotion was known as the World Wrestling Federation) until the series moved to TNN (now Spike) in September 2000, before returning to the channel in October 2005. As of 2016, it is also the home of WWE's secondary weekly show, SmackDown.
Sports programming.
USA Network has a longstanding history with sports, dating back to its existence as the Madison Square Garden Network. The network carried Major League Baseball games on Thursday nights from 1979 to 1983, and the "NHL on USA" ran from 1979 to 1985. "College Football on USA" ran from 1980 to 1986, and its telecast of the 1981 Liberty Bowl was the first college bowl game to be exclusively broadcast on cable television. The "NBA on USA" also aired from 1979 to 1984, the first time that the NBA had a cable television partner.
For 17 years from 1981 to 1998, USA aired a weekly boxing show, "USA Tuesday Night Fights", which showcased bouts featuring up-and-coming boxers. "Tennis on USA" aired professional tournaments in the United States from 1984 to 2008, and was the longtime cable home of the US Open before its cable television rights moved to ESPN2 and the Tennis Channel in 2009. The "PGA Tour on USA" covered the opening two rounds of the Masters Tournament from 1982 to 2007, Ryder Cup matches from 1989 to 2010, and various other events.
Upon the 2004 purchase of Vivendi Universal by NBC, USA's sports division was immediately merged into NBC Sports. Since 2004, the network has broadcast select events from the Olympic Games, as part of an expansion of NBCUniversal's broadcast rights to the Summer and Winter Olympics that allowed several of the company's cable channels rights to telecast Olympic events live (some of which are later re-aired on tape delay on NBC as part of the network's primetime and late night Olympic coverage). USA Network also carried games from the International Ice Hockey Federation in 2006 and 2010.
During the 2014 Winter Olympics, USA aired English Premier League soccer matches in lieu of sister channel NBCSN, due to that channel's full devotion to carrying coverage of Olympic events. After ratings success with those matches, USA began to air mid-afternoon Saturday games weekly during the 2015–16 season. USA also participates in NBC Sports's broader effort of carrying all ten Survival Sunday matches across its numerous channels the second week of May each year. Starting in 2015, USA Network became used as an overflow feed for coverage of NHL playoff games that cannot be aired by either NBCSN or CNBC. In 2016, USA will air three NASCAR races (the Sprint Cup Series race at Watkins Glen International and two Xfinity Series races at Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course and Bristol Motor Speedway) due to NBC broadcasting the 2016 Summer Olympics.
High definition.
USA Network operates a high definition simulcast feed of the channel, that broadcasts in the 1080i resolution format. The HD, which was launched on October 3, 2007, is currently available on all major cable providers.
International.
Canada.
In February 2007, Shaw Communications submitted an application to the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), to carry the USA Network in Canada as a foreign service that would be eligible for carriage by domestic cable and satellite providers (and to automatically allow all English-language general interest cable networks from the United States into Canada). However, because of programming rights issues with other Canadian specialty channels, certain programs would be subjected to blackout restrictions, including "WWE Raw".
In September 2007, the CRTC refused Shaw's request to carry USA Network in Canada on the basis that the channel carried too much programming that overlapped with the English language digital cable specialty channel Mystery TV (which is then owned by Canwest – later Shaw Media – and formerly, Groupe TVA). However, on September 20, the CRTC stated that it would reconsider their denial of the eligible foreign carriage proposal for USA Network at a later date, when Shaw instead offered to carry the channel on the digital cable tiers of its Shaw Cable systems. In spite of this, the CRTC has since rejected the restructured proposal on the basis that USA's programming would be competitive with Mystery TV.
Many of USA's original programs currently air on either Showcase or Bravo. WWE programming that airs on USA also airs on Rogers Media-owned Sportsnet 360.
South America.
Regional versions of USA Network previously operated in certain Latin American countries (such as Argentina and Brazil); in September 2004, most of these services were renamed under the Universal Channel banner to take advantage of the more well-known brand, and to reduce the awkwardness of a channel branded with the initials of another nation.

</doc>
<doc id="77827" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77827" title="DeKalb County, Alabama">
DeKalb County, Alabama

DeKalb County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 71,109. Its county seat is Fort Payne and it is named after Major General Baron Johan DeKalb.
History.
DeKalb County was created by the Alabama legislature on January 9, 1836, from land ceded to the Federal government by the Cherokee Nation. It was named for Major General Baron Johann de Kalb, a hero of the American Revolution.
DeKalb County was the one time home of the famous Cherokee Native American Sequoyah.
The county's eastern edge, along the state line, was also the epicenter of an earthquake on April 29, 2003, measuring 4.6 on the Richter scale. Power was knocked out in the area, mirrors and pictures thrown to the floor, foundations cracked, and one chimney fell to the ground. It was felt over a significant portion of the southeastern states, including quite strongly in northeastern Alabama and neighboring northwestern Georgia, and nearby eastern Tennessee (especially near Chattanooga). It was also felt slightly in western upstate South Carolina, far west-southwestern North Carolina, south and southeastern Kentucky, and east-northeastern Mississippi.
On the whole, DeKalb County is a dry county. In 2005, a change in local laws enabled Fort Payne to become the only location in the county to allow the legal sale of alcohol. Collinsville later allowed alcohol sales.
DeKalb County saw the highest death toll in Alabama during a massive tornadic system in April 2011, the 2011 Super Outbreak, with 31 deaths reported in the county.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 64,452 people, 25,113 households, and 18,432 families residing in the county. The population density was 83 people per square mile (32/km2). There were 28,051 housing units at an average density of 36 per square mile (14/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 92.55% White(non-Hispanic), 1.68% Black or African American, 0.80% Native American, 0.19% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 3.10% from other races, and 1.62% from two or more races. 5.55% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
According to the census of 2000, the largest ancestry groups in DeKalb County were English 78.31%, Scotch-Irish 8.29%, Scottish 3.33%, Irish 3.31%, Welsh 1.22%, and African 1.68%
2010 census.
As of the census of 2010, there were 64,452 people, 26,842 households, and 19,361 families residing in the county. The population density was 92 people per square mile (36/km2). There were 31,109 housing units at an average density of 39.9 per square mile (15/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 84.5% White(non-Hispanic), 1.5% Black or African American, 1.4% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 9.9% from other races, and 2.2% from two or more races. 13.6% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

</doc>
<doc id="77828" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77828" title="Elmore County, Alabama">
Elmore County, Alabama

Elmore County is a county of the State of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 79,303. Its county seat is Wetumpka. Its name is in honor of General John A. Elmore.
Elmore County is part of the Montgomery, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area.
History.
Elmore County was established on February 15, 1866, from portions of Autauga, Coosa, Tallapoosa, and Montgomery counties.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (5.9%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 65,874 people, 22,737 households, and 17,552 families residing in the county. The population density was 106 people per square mile (41/km2). There were 25,733 housing units at an average density of 41 per square mile (16/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 77.02% White, 20.64% Black or African American, 0.43% Native American, 0.36% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.48% from other races, and 1.04% from two or more races. 1.22% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 22,737 households out of which 37.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.40% were married couples living together, 12.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.80% were non-families. 20.00% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.07.
In the county the population was spread out with 25.70% under the age of 18, 8.80% from 18 to 24, 32.10% from 25 to 44, 22.70% from 45 to 64, and 10.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 102.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.30 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $41,243, and the median income for a family was $47,155. Males had a median income of $32,643 versus $24,062 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,650. About 7.40% of families and 10.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.20% of those under age 18 and 11.30% of those age 65 or over. In the late 1990s voters voted to pass a mandatory fire fee for volunteer fire services. All citizens pay this same fee regardless of valuation of the property or income levels.
2010 census.
As of the census of 2010, there were 79,303 people, 28,301 households, and 21,003 families residing in the county. The population density was 128 people per square mile (49/km2). There were 32,657 housing units at an average density of 49.7 per square mile (19.2/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 76.2% White, 20.0% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. 2.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 28,301 households out of which 32.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.6% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.8% were non-families. 22.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.04.
In the county the population was spread out with 23.6% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 27.9% from 25 to 44, 27.4% from 45 to 64, and 11.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37.8 years. For every 100 females there were 95.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.7 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $53,128, and the median income for a family was $62,870. Males had a median income of $46,952 versus $31,542 for females. The per capita income for the county was $22,640. About 9.1% of families and 12.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.8% of those under age 18 and 9.4% of those age 65 or over.
Government and infrastructure.
The Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women of the Alabama Department of Corrections is in Wetumpka in Elmore County. The prison houses Alabama's female death row. Wetumpka was previously the site of the Wetumpka State Penitentiary.
Economy.
Over the past two decades, Elmore County has transferred from an economy based on agriculture to one of Alabama's fastest-growing counties. According to a recent report, 1110 jobs were created over the last 4 years.
Elmore County's largest employer is the manufacturing sector. The top ten manufacturers in Elmore County include: GKN Aerospace, Neptune Technologies, Frontier Yarns, Russell Corporation, Madix, Inc, Arrowhead Composites, Hanil USA, YESAC Alabama Corporation, Quality Networks, Inc., and AES Industries.
Education.
The Elmore County Public School System serves the county.

</doc>
<doc id="77830" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77830" title="Decatur County, Alabama">
Decatur County, Alabama

Decatur County is a former county of the state of Alabama, United States. It was named for Commodore Stephen Decatur of the United States Navy. Its county seat was Woodville.
History.
Decatur County was established by the Alabama Legislature on December 7, 1821. In 1822, Woodville was selected as the county seat. Several years later, however, a survey showed the county did not have the minimum constitutional area, and so Decatur County was abolished on December 28, 1825 and divided between Madison County and Jackson County. The section added to Madison County was known informally for many years as "New Madison".

</doc>
<doc id="77831" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77831" title="William Morris Davis">
William Morris Davis

William Morris Davis (February 12, 1850 – February 5, 1934) was an American geographer, geologist, geomorphologist, and meteorologist, often called the "father of American geography".
He was born into a Quaker family in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, son of Edward M. Davis and Maria Mott Davis (a daughter of the women's advocate Lucretia Mott). He graduated from Harvard University in 1869 and received a Master of Engineering in the following year.
Davis initially worked in Córdoba, Argentina as a meteorologist for three years and after working as an assistant to Nathaniel Shaler, he became an instructor in geology at Harvard, in 1879. The same year he married Ellen B. Warner of Springfield, Massachusetts. While Davis never completed his PhD, he was appointed to his first full professorship in 1890 and remained in academia and teaching throughout his life.
Davis' most influential scientific contribution was the "geographical cycle", first defined in his 1889 article, "The Rivers and Valleys of Pennsylvania", which was a model of how rivers erode uplifted land to base level. His cycle of erosion suggests that (larger) rivers have three main stages of development, generally divided into youthful, mature and old-age stages. Each stage has distinct landforms and other properties associated with them, which can occur along the length of a river's upper, middle, and lower course.
Though the cycle of erosion was a crucial early contribution to the development of geomorphology, many of Davis' theories regarding landscape evolution, sometimes termed 'Davisian geomorphology', were heavily criticized by later geomorphologists. When Davis retired from Harvard in 1911, the study of landscape evolution was nearly monopolized by his theories. It was characteristic of Davis to react violently and disdainfully to criticism, particularly to the German criticism in the 1920s headed by Walther Penck; it was also his characteristic to choose to attack the most vulnerable points of that criticism. Since that time, with a less dogmatic approach and greater knowledge, some authors note that Penck's and Davis' ideas have become more compatible and even complementary since the advent of modern tectonic theory. They claim that Davis' ideas are more applicable near active margins where tectonics are "cataclysmic", and Penck's ideas fit better in models of passive margins and continental platforms.
He was a founder of the Association of American Geographers in 1904, and heavily involved with the National Geographic Society in its early years, writing a number of articles for the magazine. Davis retired from Harvard in 1911. He was awarded the Patron's Gold Medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1919. 
After his first wife died, Davis married Mary M. Wyman of Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1914, and, after her death, he married Lucy L. Tennant of Milton, Massachusetts 
in 1928, who survived him.
He died in Pasadena, California, shortly before his 84th birthday. His Cambridge home is a National Historic Landmark.
Legacy.
The valley of Davisdalen in Nathorst Land at Spitsbergen, Svalbard is named after him. 

</doc>
<doc id="77832" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77832" title="The Weather Channel">
The Weather Channel

The Weather Channel is an American basic cable and satellite television channel, owned by a consortium made up of The Blackstone Group, Bain Capital, and NBCUniversal. Its headquarters is located in Atlanta, Georgia.
Launched on May 2, 1982, the channel broadcasts weather forecasts and weather-related news and analysis, along with documentaries and entertainment programming related to weather. A sister network, Weatherscan, is a digital cable and satellite service that offers 24-hour automated local forecasts and radar imagery.
In addition to its programming on the cable channel, TWC also provided forecasts for terrestrial and satellite radio stations, newspapers and websites, and maintained an extensive online presence at weather.com and through a set of mobile applications for smartphones and tablet computers. These services are now administered by The Weather Channel's former parent company, The Weather Company, which was sold to IBM in 2016. The Weather Channel continues to license its brand assets and weather data from IBM.
, The Weather Channel was received by approximately 89.7 million American households that subscribe to a pay television service (77.1% of U.S. households with at least one television set). As recently as February 2015, the network was the most distributed cable network in the United States with 97.3 million subscribers (or 83.6% of US households). However, it was subsequently dropped by Verizon FiOS (losing its approximately 5.5 million subscribers), giving the title of most distributed network to HLN. Actual viewership of the channel averaged 210,000 during 2013 and has been declining for several years.
History.
The Weather Channel was founded on July 18, 1980, by veteran television meteorologist John Coleman (who, at the time of the channel's founding, had formerly served as a chief meteorologist at ABC owned-and-operated station WLS-TV in Chicago and as a forecaster for "Good Morning America") and Frank Batten, then-president of the channel's original owner Landmark Communications (now Landmark Media Enterprises). The channel launched at 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time on May 2, 1982. Originally, regional and local information was obtained by the National Weather Service for broadcast. Since 2002, all forecasting has been done on-site in Atlanta.
Current.
The Weather Channel uses special proprietary equipment that inserts information on current and future local weather conditions, and weather alerts issued by the National Weather Service and the Storm Prediction Center, if it is viewed on a cable television provider. The original WeatherStar technology has been upgraded on larger cable systems to the IntelliStar, which incorporates "Vocal Local" to announce current conditions, weather bulletins and detailed local forecasts. Subscribers of satellite, IPTV and some smaller cable providers originally saw only a roundup of local TWC-sourced forecasts for major cities across the U.S., as well as national and regional satellite and radar images, and severe weather watch and warning maps when active. However, satellite customers with newer systems or interactive receivers have the choice of "roundups" or localized forecasts. For both cable and satellite viewers, popular and smooth jazz music plays in the background during these segments. Some older WeatherStar units were still in use by small cable companies that couldn't afford to upgrade to the IntelliStar. The WeatherStar units are also able to overlay text-based local contact information over the national feed during certain business advertisements aired on the channel.
The Weather Channel operates a service based on modified versions of the WeatherStar technology called Weatherscan, a separate channel which constantly displays local and regional conditions, and forecasts, along with The Weather Channel's logo and advertisements.
TWC's sister channels in Canada are the English language The Weather Network and the French language MétéoMédia, which use similar technology to that currently in use in the United States. The Weather Channel also runs websites in Latin America ("Canal de Tiempo"), Brazil ("Canal do Tempo"), the United Kingdom ("Weather Channel"), France ("Météo 123") and Germany ("Wetter 123"). Apart from its stake in the Weather Network/MétéoMédia, TWC only runs its U.S. channel, although it does produce international forecasts. Also The Weather Channel has Weather station in national universities of USA ("MIT","The University of California"), Canada ("University of Toronto"), UK ("University of Oxford","Lancaster University") and Global Meteo Station in North Pole and International Space Station.
A definitive history of the network, "The Weather Channel: The Improbable Rise of a Media Phenomenon", by Jeffrey L. Cruikshank and network co-founder Frank Batten, was published by "Harvard Business Press" in May 2002, in honor of TWC's 20th anniversary.
Sale to NBCUniversal, Bain, and Blackstone.
On January 3, 2008, Landmark Communications put The Weather Channel and its assets up for sale. On July 6, 2008, NBC Universal, Bain Capital and Blackstone Group agreed to jointly purchase The Weather Channel from Landmark, making it the channel's first ownership change in 26 years. The sale was finalized on September 12, 2008. NBC Universal also owned NBC Weather Plus, a rival service which was carried by and featured content from the NBC television network's local affiliates; that service announced its discontinuation three months later. Subchannels carrying Weather Plus have since switched to the similarly formatted The Local AccuWeather Channel, kept the Weather Plus engine, or switched affiliations to other networks such as This TV or the Retro Television Network; some have shut down entirely.
From November 2008 to February 2009, The Weather Channel laid off seven long-time on-camera meteorologists: Kristina Abernathy, Eboni Deon, Kristin Dodd, Rich Johnson, Cheryl Lemke, Mark Mancuso and Dave Schwartz (Schwartz would return to TWC in April 2014). With the exception of Deon, all had been on the air for more than ten years, and three of them had been employed by the network for more than twenty years. In July 2010, The Weather Channel terminated Bill Keneely, the last of the original on-camera meteorologists who appeared on the network's first broadcasts in 1982. In December of that year, the network also laid off on-camera meteorologist Nicole Mitchell, who later would file a lawsuit against The Weather Channel in 2012, alleging that she had been terminated because the channel's new owners disapproved of the time required by her simultaneous duties as a Captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserve as one of the "Hurricane Hunters" team; such reserve duties are protected by U.S. law (Mitchell now serves as the chief meteorologist at Al Jazeera America, which for a time also employed Eboni Deon).
Inevitably, the merger of NBC on-air meteorologists began in May 2009. Former NBC Weather Plus meteorologist Todd Santos joined The Weather Channel on May 2 of that year. Al Roker of NBC's "Today" began hosting a one-hour morning program called "Wake Up With Al", alongside meteorologist Stephanie Abrams later in the summer. However, for New York City-based forecasting operations (those utilized for forecasts on MSNBC and CNBC, for instance), the former NBC Weather Plus forecasting, radar and graphics systems remain in place, with banners changed to fit The Weather Channel's graphics scheme. On September 10, 2009, The Weather Channel co-founder Frank Batten died.
Later years.
In January 2012, David Kenny took over as chief executive officer of The Weather Channel, replacing former AOL executive Mike Kelly, who had been appointed as the company's CEO in the summer of 2009. Although all operations, sales support and marketing and the bulk of employees are located in the headquarters in Atlanta, Kenny declined to move there, and continues to live and work from his home in Boston, visiting Atlanta once or twice per quarter. This is counter to general company policy which discourages telecommuting for the majority of employees. Later in 2012, The Weather Channel's holding company changed its name from The Weather Channel Companies to The Weather Company. The company also purchased competing weather service and website Weather Underground the same year. On March 10, 2015 Verizon FiOS dropped The Weather Channel and WeatherScan for their rival, AccuWeather.
It is unknown if this will be permanent.
On September 9, 2015, the channel announced a phased overhaul of its programming schedule during 2016, in which the channel would gradually shift its focus back towards a forecast-based lineup; the channel cancelled "Wake Up with Al" (due to the prohibitive costs of renting the Rockefeller Center studio) and announced that "AMHQ" would be reformatted as a weather-focused program (eliminating lifestyle segments), with Stephanie Abrams taking over as host while original host Sam Champion will become a contributor for its prime time schedule starting November 2. The network also announced it would no longer greenlight original long-form programming, and expand live forecast programming on its schedule throughout 2016 once all remaining long-form programs already in development conclude their runs. In a memo sent out to network staff by Weather Company CEO David Kenny, it cited the refocusing towards weather-based programs was done on the basis that "our most passionate fans come to us for the weather and the science behind the weather, not our original shows." Around 50 TWC employees – including production, engineering and financial staff – were laid off, and the television channel's budget was reduced to focus investments on the company's internet and mobile properties.
In August 2015, reports surfaced that The Weather Company's owners were considering a sale of all or part of the venture, having hired Morgan Stanley and PJT Partners to explore their options. On October 28, 2015, it was announced that IBM would acquire most of The Weather Company's assets, including weather.com, Weather Underground, the related mobile applications, and their underlying data platforms, for an undisclosed amount. IBM plans to leverage its Watson technology as part of the acquisition, foreseeing its use for weather analytics and predictions. The deal, which closed the following January, does not include The Weather Channel itself, which remains owned by the Bain/Blackstone/NBCUniversal consortium, and entered into a long-term licensing agreement with IBM for use of its weather data and "The Weather Channel" name and branding.
International versions.
Over the years, attempts to broadcast international versions of TWC – apart from Canada's The Weather Network/MétéoMédia and the Australian version of The Weather Channel (now Sky News Weather Channel) – have failed. TWC also operates websites that provide localized forecasts in Brazil, France, Germany, India, Latin America and the United Kingdom, but some of these sites apparently have not been developed further since 2003. The Weather Channel also shares radar imagery and forecasts with The Weather Network, particularly for The Weather Channel's Canadian forecasts.
Local on the 8s.
Since its inception, The Weather Channel has broadcast segments providing local weather observations and forecasts generated by WeatherStar systems ("STAR" being an acronym for Satellite Transponder Addressable Receiver), proprietary computer units that are installed at the headends of individual cable providers. Until 1995, the forecast segments aired at various times each hour, but are currently shown at times ending in "8" – as such, in 1996 (although it would not be used full-time until 2002), the channel adopted "Local on the 8s" as the title for the segments (though local forecast segments aired on the channel are reduced to once per half-hour whenever non-forecast programs air). With the introduction of the IntelliStar system (the sixth-generation STAR system, which was introduced in 2002), traffic information was also generated that provided roadway flow, construction and accident information for metropolitan areas where traffic.com (via its TrafficPulse service) provides traffic data; however, this feature was eliminated from the IntelliStar's programmed "flavors" (the arrangements of specialized segments played during individual local forecasts) when traffic.com ended its content agreement with TWC in 2010.
The WeatherStar systems also utilize a Lower Display Line (LDL) that appears at the bottom of the screen during all programming (until November 2013, it had been limited to only local forecasts and national programming, while being removed from the screen during commercial breaks), providing current conditions for a specific location and two or three towns within 15 miles, almanac data and forecasts on cable headends using the IntelliStar system, and only current conditions and forecasts on cable headends using STAR models from WeatherStar XL and older. WeatherStar units also allow cable providers to scroll text messages when in use, including the capability to broadcast severe weather advisories and warnings in effect for the jurisdiction in which the WeatherStar system's cable headend is located and its immediate surrounding area.
Related services.
Radio and newspaper presence.
The Weather Channel provides forecasts for satellite radio provider Sirius XM Radio in the United States. Both services run regional forecasts on a single station, and operate several individual stations providing combined local weather and traffic information for major metropolitan areas.
TWC also maintains content partnerships with a number of local U.S. radio stations to provide local forecasts, using announcers separate from the meteorologists seen on the television channel. For some affiliates, The Weather Channel provides a limited amount of live coverage during local severe weather events (with the Georgia-based announcers connected via ISDN). Distribution of TWC radio content is currently handled by Westwood One.
Similarly, The Weather Channel also provides weather reports for a number of newspapers around the United States. This included a half-page national forecast for "USA Today", which TWC provided content for until September 2012, when rival AccuWeather replaced The Weather Channel as the paper's forecast provider with TWC's forecasts being replaced with AccuWeather's on the USAToday.com website one month later.
Online services.
TWC provides numerous customized forecasts for online users through its website, weather.com, including home and garden, and event planning forecasts. Third-party web analytics providers Alexa and SimilarWeb rate the site as the 146th and 244th most visited website in the world respectively, as of July 2015. SimilarWeb rates the site as the most visited weather website globally, attracting more than 126 million visitors per month.
It also provides WAP access for mobile phone users, desktop widgets for quick reference by computer users, and customized weather feeds for individual websites. Cell phone customers can also receive local forecasts from TWC sent to their mobile handsets via SMS by sending a text message with their ZIP code to 42278 (which spells "4cast"). The Weather Channel also provides weather forecasts for other online services including Yahoo!.
In addition, The Weather Channel maintains apps for the iPhone, iPad, Android, Apple TV, Kindle Fire, and Windows mobile and tablet platforms. TWC formerly maintained two versions of its mobile applications: a free version that incorporates advertising and a pay version called "TWC Max" that does not feature advertising, the latter was discontinued in favor of an all ad-supported model on January 6, 2014. Aside from location-based weather forecast information, the apps provide radar maps, and tropical and seasonal updates, as well as social media related functions that track weather-related Twitter messages and allow users to send Facebook friends severe weather alerts. The channel also disseminates severe weather information, and photos and videos submitted by meteorologists and viewers, on its Twitter feed (@TWCBreaking, which also serves as a hashtag usable for posts).
In July 2012, The Weather Company (owner of The Weather Channel) purchased competing weather website Weather Underground. While The Weather Channel already had success with its own mobile apps, it plans to use Weather Underground's large network of digital forecasting and tracking websites to bolster its digital growth. Weather Underground operates separately from The Weather Channel and continues to provide its own forecasts, though its website incorporates some weather news and video content from TWC.
Programming.
Weather forecast programming made up TWC's entire schedule prior to its incorporation of weather-related original programming – referred in network promotional materials and press releases as "long-form programming" – in 2000 (with few breakaways from its forecast programs prior to then, outside of educational program "The Weather Classroom", an original program produced as part of the cable television industry's Cable in the Classroom initiative). The number of hours devoted to TWC's in-studio forecast programs have steadily eroded since then. , the network's live studio programs air regularly from 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., 10 p.m., and 1 a.m.Eastern Time on weekdays and 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Eastern Time on Saturdays and Sundays. "AMHQ" airs weekdays between 5:00 and 9:00 a.m. Eastern Time; these are followed by The Weather Channel's flagship program, "Weather Center Live" which airs from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Eastern., and the network's evening program, "Weather Underground" which airs from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern. On weekends, "AMHQ" airs from 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., followed by "Weekend Recharge" from 9:00 am to 12:00 p.m.
The Weather Channel also broadcasts original weather-related documentary/entertainment series and specials. These programs run from 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. Eastern Time on weekdays and 12:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. Eastern Time on weekends ("The Weather Classroom" airs at 5:00 a.m. on weekend mornings). During severe weather events affecting portions of the United States, The Weather Channel may preempt original programming in favor of airing special extended editions of "Weather Center Live" to provide long-form coverage and analysis; pre-emptions vary between local (isolated to viewers in the region affected by a particular weather event) and nationwide, depending upon the impact of the weather phenomenon/story and if a local provider utilizes a later model WeatherStar unit that allows the use of dual feeds that can substitute programming with long-form weather coverage in a given area.
Movies.
In a move that caused controversy with many longtime viewers, The Weather Channel began airing weather-related movies on Friday nights on October 30, 2009. The first feature to be broadcast by the channel was the 2000 film "The Perfect Storm".
After December 2009, these weekly movies were discontinued for the time being in favor of running "Weather Center", which already aired throughout primetime during the rest of the work week. Despite the controversy, the Friday night film block resumed on March 26, 2010 under the title "Flick and a Forecast," co-hosted by The Weather Channel meteorologist Jen Carfagno and MSNBC contributor Touré, with the documentary "Into Thin Air: Deaths on Everest". During the broadcasts, the Lower Display Line that normally appears on TWC shows to provide local weather information (with breakaways during forecast and most long-form programs only for commercial breaks) was removed, appearing only a few times each hour during the film as a substitute for the standard "Local on the 8s" segments, with a translucent TWC logo bug appearing at other times during the film when the LDL was not on-screen.
While the films shown within the "Flick and a Forecast" block were weather-related in some form, some films featured (such as "Misery" and "Deep Blue Sea") had only a minimal tie to weather. On May 31, 2010, "NewsBlues" reported The Weather Channel's decision to cancel the movie block, due in part to viewer criticism of movies being shown on what is intended as a news and information channel, as well as a snafu that occurred during an April 2010 tornado outbreak that led to a scheduled movie being aired instead of wall-to-wall severe weather coverage. The "Flick and a Forecast" presentations were then replaced by an additional hour of "Weather Center" and a two-hour block of long-form original programs.
Branding.
Logos.
The Weather Channel's original and most recognized logo was a blue rectangular box with rounded edges that debuted with TWC's first broadcast on May 2, 1982. This logo was revised in 1996, with the corners becoming less rounded and the logo becoming slightly flat. The "weather.com" URL text was permanently added underneath the logo in 2000. On August 15, 2005, the logo was overhauled again; the logo became a straight-edged square with no white trim on the edge and "The Weather Channel" text became oriented in title-case and left-justified, similar to its Canadian sister channel The Weather Network. A 25th anniversary logo used in 2007 featured a white square edged in blue connected to the current logo with the text "25 YEARS" inside it in blue.
Since NBCUniversal became a co-owner of the network in 2008, the network has participated in the "Green is Universal" campaign, which occurs twice a year, usually during April and November. The network's logo changes to a shade of green as part of the campaign promoting environmental conservation.
Controversies and criticism.
2007 global warming controversy.
In 2006, the Washington, D.C.-based website "Capital Weather" conducted an interview with Brian van de Graaff, meteorologist at ABC affiliate WJLA-TV, in which he stated:
On December 21, 2006, Dr. Heidi Cullen reacted to this in a blog post titled "Junk Controversy not Junk Science" on The Weather Channel's website:
Global warming was voted #1 in The Weather Channel special "100 Biggest Weather Moments".
In 2014, David Kenny, CEO of The Weather Channel's parent The Weather Company, distanced the company from comments made by the channel's co-founder John Coleman denying climate change, calling it "bad bad science". In a communication to employees, Kenny said "we appreciate the contributions he made more than 30 years ago. However, we want to be clear: John Coleman is no longer affiliated with our company, and his opinions do not represent The Weather Company". Kenny reiterated the company's position of support for scientific consensus on the subject and pointed to their position statement as a reference.
Programming controversies.
The channel's original format was akin to that of a news and information cable network. Since the creation of the series "Atmospheres" in 2000 and "Storm Stories" in 2003, The Weather Channel has seen a gradual transition toward a mix of weather forecast programming and weather-related entertainment programming that paralleled the launch of sister network Weatherscan, the evolution of the always-on "L" bar/weather ticker, the development of weather.com and popular branded mobile phone applications, and the increased viewing and interest in documentary programs on the topic of weather. Currently, The Weather Channel broadcasts a large proportion of its non-forecast/news content on weekends with sixteen hours of the channel's weekend lineup consisting of these programs, along with eight hours of non-forecast programming each weekday. The decision to show movie and series content related to weather has caused criticism from many viewers and media analysts, who have blasted The Weather Channel for deviating from its format of running weather information 24 hours a day to run more infotainment programming.
The controversy further escalated on April 30, 2010, when The Weather Channel chose to go ahead with its scheduled airing of the 1992 film "Wind" (a film about yachting that had little to do with weather, contrary to its name) even though a tornado outbreak was ongoing in Missouri and Arkansas. Meteorologist Jim Cantore publicly stated on his Twitter profile that he was "severely misled" into believing the channel would cancel the movie's telecast in favor of running wall-to-wall tornado coverage and issued a public apology for the incident. TWC had opted to instead transmit special "dual-feed" updates to Intellistar units in the affected areas rather than provide coverage to national viewers; however, much of the affected area was rural, and many viewers in these areas either subscribed to cable providers that utilized legacy STAR systems (WeatherSTAR Jr.'s, 4000s or XLs) or satellite providers that did not support the dual-feed feature.
In November 2013, the channel introduced a new initiative of "weather all the time" in response to the criticism; all original programming – which was rebranded under the tagline "Natural Drama" – will now have direct relevance to weather-related subjects, and the network reemphasized its promise to interrupt original programming either regionally or nationally during major weather events; in addition, The Weather Channel extended the display of its Lower Display Line (which also experienced a design revamp as part of the introduction of a new graphics package) to commercial breaks and through entire broadcasts of its original programs.
Cable and satellite carriage disputes.
Dish Network carriage dispute.
On May 20, 2010, Dish Network announced that it was dropping The Weather Channel at 12:00 a.m. Eastern Time that day in favor of its own similar weather information channel, The Weather Cast. The carriage dispute was over the rates that The Weather Channel asked Dish Network to pay: from 11¢ per subscriber per month to 12¢, a 9% increase, totaling $140,000 per month. The dispute was also over The Weather Channel's programming format shifting from an information-based channel to an entertainment-based service. The Weather Channel said in a statement, "Dish has chosen to be the first distributor to drop The Weather Channel rather than pay the standard industry rates others in the industry have already agreed to pay", and encouraged Dish Network customers to switch to other pay television providers. Dave Shull, senior vice president for programming for Dish Network said The Weather Channel's fees were harder for the satellite provider to justify paying as more people receive weather information through the internet and mobile services: "They're looking for bid increases when I feel like there's a real migration to the Web, and it's difficult to really justify those rate increases at this time."
On May 24, 2010, The Weather Channel announced that it had reached a new multi-year carriage agreement with Dish Network, the financial terms of which were not disclosed. Despite the earlier announcement that The Weather Channel would be dropped, the channel was never officially removed from Dish Network. The Weather Cast ceased operations in anticipation of the launch of a Weatherscan-based service announced as part of the agreement that would provide local weather information for Dish Network customers. The proposed movie scheduled for the Friday after the deal was struck (May 28), "Gorillas in the Mist", was dropped in favor of a six-hour marathon of "Tornado Road".
DirecTV carriage dispute.
DirecTV removed The Weather Channel from its lineup at 12:00 a.m. Eastern Time on January 14, 2014, after the two parties were unable to come to terms on a new carriage agreement; as a result, DirecTV became the first major pay television provider to drop the channel in its history. Two weeks before the channel's carriage agreement was set to expire on December 31 (after which the deadline for a new carriage deal was extended by two weeks), the satellite provider began carrying WeatherNation TV (the successor to The Weather Cast and owned by WeatherNation, LLC) on channel 361 on December 16, 2013 – placing the channel next to The Weather Channel's slot on channel 362; WeatherNation replaced The Weather Channel on channel 362 – while still being carried on channel 361 – when TWC was pulled.
The Weather Channel's chief executive officer David Kenny stated that it offered DirecTV the best rate for its programming (according to SNL Kagan, The Weather Channel's average carriage fee at the time was 13¢ per subscriber), and blasted the satellite provider's removal of the channel by stating that it was putting profits ahead of public safety. Representatives for DirecTV stated that it added WeatherNation TV in response to subscriber complaints regarding the number of reality programs on The Weather Channel, which it estimated had amounted to 40% of its daily schedule (WeatherNation TV, which outside of its carriage by DirecTV is primarily carried on broadcast television stations as a main channel affiliation or a digital multicast service, does not run programming outside of forecasts with the only interruption in its weather coverage coming from affiliates that carry children's programs to fulfill FCC educational programming requirements; however, WeatherNation has been criticized for its absence of live programming, which TWC does provide, especially during significant weather events). DirecTV stated that weather information is also available through broadcast television stations carried as part of its local channel tier, as well as the provider's designated emergency channels. The Weather Channel fought back by airing commercials encouraging people to not subscribe to DirecTV by parodying the provider's popular "When You..." ad campaign.
On April 8, 2014, The Weather Channel and DirecTV both settled on a new agreement (TWC decided to alter its programming lineup by trimming the amount of reality programming on weekdays in half, restricting them to its nighttime schedule, in response to complaints from DirecTV subscribers), with the provider restoring the channel on channel 362 the following day. Access to local weather content using the red button feature did not return until May 2, 2014.
Removal by Verizon FiOS.
Verizon FiOS dropped The Weather Channel and its sister network Weatherscan from its lineup at 12:00 a.m. Eastern Time on March 10, 2015 after the two parties were unable to come to terms on a new carriage agreement. The services have respectively been replaced by the AccuWeather Network (which launched on March 10) and a widget provided by FiOS featuring forecast content provided by WeatherBug. No public announcement was made regarding the removal until over 12 hours after TWC and Weatherscan were pulled. The Weather Channel offered a less expensive deal to Verizon FiOS, which rejected the offer. Verizon cited the wide availability of the internet and mobile apps for consumers to access weather content any time of day as the reason for dropping TWC and its services. It is unknown if Frontier FiOS customers in clusters formerly served by Verizon are affected.
A representative for the network said in a statement, "We were disappointed when, without warning late yesterday, March 9, Verizon FiOS dropped The Weather Channel from their lineup while our companies continued to be in active conversations regarding a contract renewal. FiOS customers have enjoyed a bundle of services from The Weather Channel including the network, Weatherscan, On-Demand, a Weather Widget and streaming on mobile devices. During a winter with record-breaking storms and severe weather, The Weather Channel responded with non-stop live coverage, including the ongoing presence of our crews reporting live from hard-hit communities within the Verizon FiOS footprint. This coverage resulted in The Weather Channel being the only major cable network to grow in February."
The Weather Channel had earlier signed renewal agreements with major providers that are members of the National Cable Television Cooperative (NCTC), including Time Warner Cable and Cox Communications. However, representatives for the channel were shocked that "Verizon FiOS would deny their subscribers access to the best live weather coverage and expertise that only The Weather Channel can provide." While Verizon claimed it was a long-term business decision (instead of a carriage dispute) that it made, The Weather Channel launched a campaign, originally urging viewers to contact FiOS about restoring the cable channel and its services. But, seeing that Verizon is not planning on bringing the channel and its services back in the near future, The Weather Channel now urges its viewers to switch providers.
Winter storm naming.
In the fall of 2012, The Weather Channel began to assign names to major winter storm systems. The channel's management stated the decision to start naming notable winter storms came as a way to more easily spread knowledge and raise awareness. By naming winter storms, TWC stated that the public would find it easier to follow storm information, social media will be able to refer to and discuss the storm, and people will have an easier time referring to the storm after it occurs. Most independent sources identify the use of winter storm names by The Weather Channel as a form of SEO-friendly branding.
The first winter storm to be named by TWC was a nor'easter that hit the East Coast of the United States in November 2012, which it named after the Greek goddess Athena. During the 2012–13 season, The Weather Channel named 27 winter storms (Athena, Brutus, Caesar, Draco, Euclid, Freyr, Gandolf, Helen, Iago, Jove, Khan, Luna, Magnus, Nemo, Orko, Plato, Q, Rocky, Saturn, Triton, Ukko, Virgil, Walda, Xerxes, Yogi, Zeus and Achilles). Multiple factors are taken into consideration when deciding whether to name a winter storm. This includes, but is not limited to, predicted snowfall and other precipitation, wind speeds, and the timing of the storm.
The Weather Channel has provided the reasoning behind their decision to name certain storms, in particular Athena, Brutus, Gandolf, Iago, Khan, Luna, Magnus, Nemo, Saturn, and Virgil.
In response, the National Weather Service announced on November 7, 2012, that it would not recognize The Weather Channel’s names for winter storms, stating in a press release that it "does not use the name of winter storms in its products." Similarly, references to the names are generally limited on TWC-provided forecasts seen on NBC's news programs.

</doc>
<doc id="77833" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77833" title="Decatur County">
Decatur County

Decatur County is the name of various past and present counties in the United States, all named for Stephen Decatur:

</doc>
<doc id="77834" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77834" title="Escambia County, Alabama">
Escambia County, Alabama

Escambia County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 38,319. Its county seat is Brewton.
Etymology.
The name "Escambia" may have been derived from the Creek name "Shambia", meaning "clearwater", or the Choctaw word for "cane-brake" or "reed-brake".
History.
Historic American Indian tribes in the area included the Muskogean-speaking Creek, Choctaw, and Alabama, who had inhabited the lands for centuries and had many settlements. The former two tribes were among those in the Southeast whom the European-American settlers called the Five Civilized Tribes, as they adopted some European-American cultural ways in an attempt to survive alongside the encroachment of settlers moving into the area in the early nineteenth century. Most of these peoples were removed by United States forces in the 1830s to Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River.
The state made land grants to European Americans, who developed the land as large cotton plantations, based on slave labor by African Americans. Some Creek remained in the area. At the time, they were required to renounce their tribal membership and were granted US and state citizenship. They continued to live as a community and to maintain ties. In the twentieth century, the Poarch Band of Creek Indians was recognized as a tribe, established a government under a written constitution, and have certain lands that were taken into trust by the federal government. They have established three gaming resorts to generate revenues for tribal health and welfare.
Escambia County was organized and established after the American Civil War, on December 10, 1868 during the Reconstruction era. The state legislature created it from parts of Baldwin and Conecuh counties, to the west and north, respectively. The area was part of the coastal plain. It was largely agricultural into the twentieth century.
The county is subject to heavy winds and rains due to seasonal hurricanes. In September 1979, the county was declared a disaster area due to damage from Hurricane Frederic. It was declared a disaster area again in September 2004 due to damage from Hurricane Ivan.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water.
Adjacent counties.
Escambia County in Alabama and Escambia County in Florida are two of 22 counties or parishes in the United States with the same name to border each other across state lines.
Demographics.
2010.
Whereas according to the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau:
2000.
As of the census of 2000, there were 38,440 people, 14,297 households, and 10,093 families residing in the county. The population density was 41 people per square mile (16/km2). There were 16,544 housing units at an average density of 18 per square mile (7/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 64.40% White, 30.79% Black or African American, 3.01% Native American, 0.24% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.40% from other races, and 1.13% from two or more races. 0.99% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 14,297 households out of which 32.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.70% were married couples living together, 15.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.40% were non-families. 26.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 2.99.
In the county the population was spread out with 24.10% under the age of 18, 9.70% from 18 to 24, 28.90% from 25 to 44, 23.70% from 45 to 64, and 13.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 102.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.70 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $28,319, and the median income for a family was $36,086. Males had a median income of $30,632 versus $18,091 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,396. About 15.20% of families and 20.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.70% of those under age 18 and 17.80% of those age 65 or over.
Government and infrastructure.
The Holman Correctional Facility of the Alabama Department of Corrections (ADOC) is in unincorporated southwestern Escambia County, north of Atmore. Holman has a male death row and the State of Alabama execution chamber. In addition the ADOC Fountain Correctional Facility is about north of Atmore.
Historic sites.
Escambia County has two sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Brewton Historic Commercial District and the Commercial Hotel-Hart Hotel.

</doc>
<doc id="77836" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77836" title="Escambia County">
Escambia County

Escambia County is the name of two counties in the United States of America:

</doc>
<doc id="77837" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77837" title="Fayette County, Alabama">
Fayette County, Alabama

Fayette County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 17,241. Its county seat is Fayette. Its name is in honor of the Marquis de Lafayette (or de la Fayette), who aided General George Washington in the American Revolutionary War.
History.
Fayette County was established on December 20, 1824 during Lafayette's historic tour of the 24 United States
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2010, there were 17,241 people, 7,493 households, and 5,342 families residing in the county. The population density was 30 people per square mile (11/km2). There were 8,472 housing units at an average density of 14 per square mile (5/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 86.92% White, 11.93% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.27% from other races, and 0.51% from two or more races. 0.82% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 7,493 households out of which 30.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.30% were married couples living together, 10.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.70% were non-families. 26.60% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.92.
In the county the population was spread out with 22.30% under the age of 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 26.50% from 25 to 44, 25.30% from 45 to 64, and 17.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 93.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.60 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $28,539, and the median income for a family was $34,560. Males had a median income of $29,239 versus $20,606 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,439. About 13.10% of families and 17.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.30% of those under age 18 and 17.90% of those age 65 or over.
Transportation.
Airport.
Richard Arthur Field (Municipal)- A paved runway with JET A and 110LL fuel service. Located about northeast of the city center.

</doc>
<doc id="77838" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77838" title="Franklin County, Alabama">
Franklin County, Alabama

Franklin County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 31,704. Its county seat is Russellville. Its name is in honor of Benjamin Franklin, famous statesman, scientist, and printer. It is a dry county, although the city of Russellville is wet.
History.
Franklin County was established on February 6, 1818.
Colbert County.
Colbert County was originally established on February 6, 1867 after it split from Franklin County over political issues after the American Civil War. It was abolished eight months later by an Alabama constitutional convention and then reestablished on February 24, 1870.
Musical history.
Many musicians and songwriters are from Franklin County including Billy Sherrill, Tammy Wynette, Ricky Pierce, Eddie Martin, Kerry Gilbert, and many others.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.0%) is water.
Demographics.
2000.
As of the census of 2000, there were 31,223 people, 12,259 households, and 8,949 families residing in the county. The population density was 49 people per square mile (19/km2). There were 13,749 housing units at an average density of 22 per square mile (8/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 89.68% White (non-Hispanic), 4.21% Black or African American, 0.33% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 4.62% from other races, and 0.96% from two or more races. 5.82% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 12,259 households out of which 32.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.20% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.00% were non-families. 24.50% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.97.
In the county the population was spread out with 24.50% under the age of 18, 9.20% from 18 to 24, 28.00% from 25 to 44, 23.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 96.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.80 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $27,177, and the median income for a family was $34,274. Males had a median income of $27,497 versus $18,631 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,814. About 15.20% of families and 18.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.60% of those under age 18 and 24.10% of those age 65 or over.
2010.
As of the census of 2010, there were 31,704 people, 12,286 households, and 8,741 families residing in the county. The population density was 57 people per square mile (22km2). There were 14,022 housing units at an average density of 21.7 per square mile (8/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 83.0% White (non-Hispanic), 3.9% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 10.5% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. 14.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 12,286 households out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.5% were married couples living together, 12.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.9% were non-families. 26.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.05
In the county the population was spread out with 24.8% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 25.3% from 45 to 64, and 15.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37.8 years. For every 100 females there were 99.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.3 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $33,942, and the median income for a family was $44,352. Males had a median income of $31,997 versus $22,747 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,094. About 14.9% of families and 19.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.2% of those under age 18 and 13.2% of those age 65 or over.
Education.
There are two school systems in Franklin County; Russellville City Schools and Franklin County Schools.
Russellville City Schools include:
Franklin County Schools include:
There is also the Franklin County Career-Technical Center, located next to Belgreen High School.

</doc>
<doc id="77840" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77840" title="Gaspard Monge">
Gaspard Monge

Gaspard Monge, Comte de Péluse (9 May 1746 – 28 July 1818) was a French mathematician, the inventor of descriptive geometry (the mathematical basis of technical drawing), and the father of differential geometry. During the French Revolution he served as the Minister of the Marine, and was involved in the reform of the French educational system, helping to found the École Polytechnique.
Biography.
Early life.
Monge was born at Beaune, Côte-d'Or, the son of a merchant. He was educated at the college of the Oratorians at Beaune. In 1762 he went to the Collège de la Trinité at Lyon, where, one year after he had begun studying, he was made a teacher of physics at the age of just seventeen.
After finishing his education in 1764 he returned to Beaune, where he made a large-scale plan of the town, inventing the methods of observation and constructing the necessary instruments; the plan was presented to the town, and is still preserved in their library. An officer of engineers who saw it wrote to the commandant of the École Royale du Génie at Mézières, recommending Monge to him and he was given a job as a draftsman.
Career.
Those studying at the school were drawn from the aristocracy, so he was not allowed admission to the institution itself. His manual skill was highly regarded, but his mathematical skills were not made use of. Nevertheless he worked on the development of his ideas in his spare time. At this time came to contact with Charles Bossut, the professor of mathematics at the École Royale "I was a thousand times tempted," he said long afterwards, "to tear up my drawings in disgust at the esteem in which they were held, as if I had been good for nothing better."
After a year at the École Royale Monge was asked to produce a plan for a fortification in such a way as to optimise its defensive arrangement. There was an established method for doing this which involved lengthy calculations but Monge devised a way of solving the problems by using drawings. At first his solution was not accepted, since it had not taken the time judged to be necessary, but upon examination the value of the work was recognized, and Monge's exceptional abilities were recognized.
After Bossut left the École Royale du Génie Monge took his place in January 1769, and in 1770 he was also appointed instructor in experimental physics.
In 1777, Monge married Cathérine Huart, who owned a forge. This caused Monge to develop an interest in metallurgy. In 1780 he became a member of the French Academy of Sciences; his friendship with C.L. Berthollet began at this time. In 1783, after leaving Mézières, he was, on the death of É. Bézout, appointed examiner of naval candidates. Although pressed by the minister to prepare a complete course of mathematics, he declined to do so, on the grounds that this would deprive Mme Bézout of her only income, that from the sale of the textbooks written by her late husband. In 1786 he wrote and published his "Traité élémentaire de la statique".
1789 and after.
The French Revolution completely changed the course of Monge's career. He was a strong supporter of the Revolution, and in 1792, on the creation by the Legislative Assembly of an executive council, Monge accepted the office of Minister of the Marine, and held this office from 10 August 1792 to 10 April 1793, when he resigned. When the Committee of Public Safety made an appeal to the academics to assist in the defence of the republic, he applied himself wholly to these operations, and distinguished himself by his energy, writing the "Description de l'art de fabriquer les canons" and "Avis aux ouvriers en fer sur la fabrication de l'acier".
He took a very active part in the measures for the establishment of the Ecole Normale (which existed only during the first four months of the year 1795), and of the school for public works, afterwards the École Polytechnique, and was at each of them professor for descriptive geometry. "Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux écoles normales" was published in 1799 from transcriptions of his lectures given in 1795. He later published "Application de l'analyse à la géométrie", which enlarged on the lectures.
From May 1796 to October 1797 Monge was in Italy with C.L. Berthollet and some artists to select the paintings and sculptures being levied from the Italians. While there he became friendly with Napoleon Bonaparte. Upon his return to France, he was appointed as the Director of the École Polytechnique, but early in 1798 he was sent to Italy on a mission that ended in the establishment, of the short-lived Roman Republic.
From there Monge joined Napoleon's expedition to Egypt, taking part with Berthollet in the scientific work of the Institut d'Égypte and the Egyptian Institute of Sciences and Arts. They accompanied Bonaparte to Syria, and returned with him in 1798 to France. Monge was appointed president of the Egyptian commission, and he resumed his connection with the École Polytechnique. His later mathematical papers are published (1794 — 1816) in the Journal and the Correspondence of the École Polytechnique. On the formation of the Sénat conservateur he was appointed a member of that body, with an ample provision and the title of count of Pelusium (Comte de Péluse), and he became the Senate conservateur's president during 1806–7. Then on the fall of Napoleon he had all of his honours taken away, and he even excluded from the list of members of the reconstituted Institute.
Monge was an atheist.
Monge died in Paris on 28 July 1818. His remains were first interred in a mausoleum in Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris and later transferred to the Panthéon in Paris.
A statue portraying him was erected in Beaune in 1849. Monge's name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the base of the Eiffel Tower.
Since 4 November 1992 the "Marine Nationale" operate the MRIS "FS Monge", named after him.
Work.
Between 1770 and 1790 Monge contributed various papers on mathematics and physics to the "Memoirs of the Academy of Turin", the "Mémoires des savantes étrangers" of the Academy of Paris, the "Mémoires" of the same Academy, and the "Annales de chimie", including "Sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais"" ("Mém. de l’acad. de Paris", 1781), which is an elegant investigation of the problem with earthworks referred to in the title and establishes in connection with it his capital discovery of the curves of curvature of a surface. It is also noteworthy to mention that in his "Mémoire sur quelques phénomènes de la vision" Monge proposed an early implicit explanation of the color constancy phenomenon based on several known observations.
Leonhard Euler, in his 1760 paper on curvature in the "Berlin Memoirs", had considered, not the normals of the surface, but the normals of the plane sections through a particular normal, so that the question of the intersection of successive normals of the surface had never presented itself to him. Monge's paper gives the ordinary differential equation of the curves of curvature, and establishes the general theory in a very satisfactory manner; the application to the interesting particular case of the ellipsoid was first made by him in a later paper in 1795.
Monge's 1781 memoir is also the earliest known anticipation of Linear Programming type of problems, in particular of the transportation problem. Related to that, the Monge soil-transport problem leads to a weak-topology definition of a distance between distributions rediscovered many times since by such as L. V. Kantorovich, P. Levy, L. N. Wasserstein, and others; and bearing their names in various combinations in various contexts.
Another of his papers in the volume for 1783 relates to the production of water by the combustion of hydrogen. Monge's results had been anticipated by Henry Cavendish.

</doc>
<doc id="77841" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77841" title="Geneva County, Alabama">
Geneva County, Alabama

Geneva County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 26,790. Its county seat is Geneva. The county was named after its county seat, which in turn was named after Geneva, New York which was named after Geneva, Switzerland, by Walter H. Yonge, an early town resident and Swiss native. Geneva County is a prohibition or dry county.
Geneva County is part of the Dothan, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area.
History.
Geneva County was established on December 26, 1868.
The county was declared a disaster area in September 1979 due to damage from Hurricane Frederic.
On March 10, 2009, a gunman, identified as Michael McLendon, went on a shooting spree at nine locations in Geneva County from the town of Samson to the city of Geneva, killing ten people and wounding six others. McLendon entered his former place of employment, Reliable Metal Products on the northeastern side of Geneva, where he took his own life.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water. It is the fifth-smallest county in Alabama by total area.
Demographics.
2010.
Whereas according to the 2010 census Bureau:
2000.
As of the census of 2000, there were 25,764 people, 10,477 households, and 7,459 families residing in the county. The population density was 45 people per square mile (17/km2). There were 12,115 housing units at an average density of 21 per square mile (8/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 87.11% White, 10.65% Black or African American, 0.76% Native American, 0.12% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.62% from other races, and 0.72% from two or more races. 1.76% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 10,477 households out of which 30.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.40% were married couples living together, 11.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.80% were non-families. 26.30% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.92.
In the county the population was spread out with 24.00% under the age of 18, 7.50% from 18 to 24, 26.80% from 25 to 44, 25.30% from 45 to 64, and 16.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 94.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.00 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $26,448, and the median income for a family was $32,563. Males had a median income of $26,018 versus $19,341 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,620. About 15.90% of families and 19.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.20% of those under age 18 and 21.80% of those age 65 or over.

</doc>
<doc id="77842" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77842" title="Greene County, Alabama">
Greene County, Alabama

Greene County is a county in the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 9,045. making it the least populous county in Alabama. Its county seat is Eutaw. Its name is in honor of Revolutionary War General Nathanael Greene of Rhode Island.
History.
Greene County was established on December 13, 1819. It is the least populated county in Alabama.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.9%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the 2010 United States Census, there were 9,045 people residing in the county. 81.5% were Black or African American, 17.4% White, 0.2% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.3% of some other race and 0.5% of two or more races. 0.8% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).
As of the census of 2000, there were 9,974 people, 3,931 households, and 2,649 families residing in the county. The population density was 15 people per square mile (6/km2). There were 5,117 housing units at an average density of 8 per square mile (3/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 19.09% White, 80.34% Black or African American, 0.12% Native American, 0.08% Asian, 0.10% from other races, and 0.27% from two or more races. 0.58% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 3,931 households out of which 32.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.40% were married couples living together, 27.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.60% were non-families. 30.80% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.16.
In the county the population was spread out with 29.20% under the age of 18, 8.90% from 18 to 24, 25.10% from 25 to 44, 22.10% from 45 to 64, and 14.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 88.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 79.00 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $19,819, and the median income for a family was $24,604. Males had a median income of $25,707 versus $19,051 for females. The per capita income for the county was $13,686. About 29.90% of families and 34.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 44.10% of those under age 18 and 31.60% of those age 65 or over.

</doc>
<doc id="77845" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77845" title="Nathaniel Greene">
Nathaniel Greene

Nathaniel Greene may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="77853" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77853" title="Lichtenstein (surname)">
Lichtenstein (surname)

Lichtenstein is surname of:

</doc>
<doc id="77854" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77854" title="Infanta Cristina of Spain">
Infanta Cristina of Spain

Infanta Cristina of Spain ("Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad de Borbón y de Grecia", born 13 June 1965) is a Spanish princess, the younger daughter of King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofía of Spain. she is sixth in the line of succession to the Spanish throne, after her brother King Felipe VI's children, her sister Elena, and Elena's children.
From 2013 she was under investigation and later on trial for fiscal fraud related to accusations of corruption about a company owned by Cristina and her husband.
Birth.
Cristina de Borbón was born in Madrid and was baptized into the Church at the Palacio de La Zarzuela by the Archbishop of Madrid. Her godparents were Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz (her first cousin once removed), and Infanta Maria Cristina of Spain (great-aunt).
Education.
The Infanta received her secondary education at Santa María del Camino School before graduating from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid in 1989 with a degree in political science. She pursued postgraduate studies at New York University, obtaining an MA in international relations in 1990. In 1991, she gained practical experience working at the UNESCO headquarters in Paris.
She speaks fluent Spanish, Catalan, English and Greek.
Marriage and children.
The Infanta married team handball player Iñaki Urdangarín in Barcelona on 4 October 1997, on which occasion her father, King Juan Carlos, created her Duchess of Palma de Mallorca for life. By Spanish custom her husband became "Duke of Palma de Mallorca", "jure uxoris". However, as of 11 June 2015, when King Felipe VI revoked Infanta Cristina's ducal title, Urdangarín lost the courtesy title.
The couple have four children, all born in Barcelona:
They lived in Washington, D.C. from 2009 to 2012, where her husband worked for Telefónica. In August 2013 she moved with her four children to Geneva, Switzerland, to take a job with the Caixa Foundation, while her husband, who is the subject of an embezzlement investigation, remained in Barcelona.
Corruption inquiry.
Her husband was investigated from early 2012 on suspicion of fraudulently obtaining millions in public funds in the Nóos case. In April 2013, Infanta Cristina was formally named as a suspect in the case by the judge in charge. When invited to comment, a Royal Household spokesman said that the "Casa Real" "does not comment on judicial decisions", yet the next day, after the anti-corruption prosecutor announced that he would appeal the decision, it relented by expressing "absolute conformity" with the legal authorities. In light of the forthcoming trial, she and her children moved to Geneva, Switzerland, in summer 2013. On 7 January 2014, a Spanish judge charged her with tax fraud and money laundering and ordered her to appear in court. The Infanta made her first appearance in the Majorca Court on 8 February 2014, where she denied any knowledge of her husband's dealings.
Spanish judge Jose Castro formalised charges against Infanta Cristina on 25 June 2014. In November 2014 the High Court of Palma de Mallorca upheld tax fraud charges against the princess, paving the way for her to face trial; however, it decided to drop money-laundering charges. Her lawyers maintained that they remained completely convinced of her innocence. On December 22, 2014, the High Court of the Balearic Islands announced that Infanta Cristina, her husband, and 15 others would stand trial on tax fraud charges "as soon as next year".
On 12 June 2015, King Felipe VI officially deprived his sister of her dukedom, privately announcing his intention beforehand. Pursuant to their meeting in person on 12 June Infanta Cristina wrote to the king (her brother) requesting the forfeiture of her noble title, immediately following which a royal decree to that effect was issued. According to newspaper "El País", between 1995 and 2013 the Spanish monarchy's approval rating dropped from 7.5 to 3.68 out of 10 amongst Spaniards. The Spanish media also attributed, in no small part, King Juan Carlos' abdication to these ongoing proceedings. Her right of succession to the throne and to the royal title of "infanta" were unaffected.
Cristina's trial began on 11 January 2016, presided over by three judges in Palma, with a maximum potential sentence of eight years if found guilty. At this date, her lawyers had asked judges to drop the criminal charges against her, and the state prosecutor said there was insufficient evidence to back up the accusations, but on January 29 the Court in Palma de Mallorca, where the trial is being held, said in a statement it was upholding the charges, which were filed by the 'Clean Hands' anti-graft organisation using a Spanish legal instrument known as the 'people's accusation'. She took the stand in March 2016, denying being an accessory to tax evasion, and denying knowledge of her husband's activities. She insisted on her right to answer only questions from her own lawyer. She said that her husband handled the couple's finances, and that she did not know why some large personal expenses were charged to a credit card of a company that the couple owned. She said that she never spoke with her husband about these matters because she was not interested in the subject, and that she was very busy with her small children.
Sports and participation in the Olympics.
She practices a number of sports including skiing, but her favorite is sailing. She has taken part in many national and international events and was a member of the Spanish Olympic sailing team at the Seoul Games in 1988 where she was standard bearer in the opening parade.
Titles, styles, honours and arms.
Titles.
As a child of a Spanish monarch, "Doña" Cristina is legally entitled to the designation and rank of infanta with the style of "Royal Highness". 
The Infanta's style and title in full: "Su Alteza Real Doña Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad de Borbón y Grecia, Infanta de España" ("Her Royal Highness" Doña "Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad de Borbón y Grecia, Infanta of Spain").
Honours.
"See also List of honours of the Spanish Royal Family by country"

</doc>
<doc id="77855" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77855" title="Hale County, Alabama">
Hale County, Alabama

Hale County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 15,760. Its county seat is Greensboro. It is named in honor of Confederate officer Stephen Fowler Hale.
Hale County is part of the Tuscaloosa, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area.
History.
Hale County was established following the end of the American Civil War, on January 30, 1867. Located in the west-central section of the state, it was created from portions of Greene, Marengo, Perry, and Tuscaloosa counties. The vast majority came from Greene County. The first American settlers hailed from Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky, and the Carolinas.
Hale County is connected to three major twentieth century artists: Walker Evans photographed the area in 1936 while he collaborated with James Agee on the 1941 book "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men". Since the 1960s, artist William Christenberry, born in Tuscaloosa, has been photographing various structures in Hale County as part of his multi-media artistic investigations. More recently, Hale County has become the home of the nationally-recognized Auburn University Rural Studio, an architectural outreach program founded by architect and artist Samuel Mockbee and D. K. Ruth. It is also the birthplace of Eugene Sawyer, the second African American mayor of Chicago.
Since the American Civil War, whites controlled economic and political power in Hale County. However, in 1997 after a highly contested mayoral election the city of Greensboro elected its first black mayor, John E. Owens Jr. The first African American chief of police was appointed in 2000, Claude Hamilton. In 2006, both black and white county residents came together and elected their first black sheriff, Kenneth W. Ellis, who was formerly the Moundville police chief.
Like many Blackbelt counties, Hale County has experienced economic decline, particularly in the southern end of the county. Many businesses and manufacturing plants have closed in and around Greensboro (the county seat). The northern portion of the county, however, has experienced population and industrial growth due to its close proximity to Tuscaloosa County
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.9%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the 2010 United States Census, there were 15,760 people residing in the county. 59.0% were Black or African American, 39.8% White, 0.2% Asian, 0.2% Native American, 0.3% of some other race and 0.6% of two or more races. 0.9% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).
As of the census of 2000, there were 17,185 people, 6,415 households, and 4,605 families residing in the county. The population density was 27 people per square mile (10/km2). There were 7,756 housing units at an average density of 12 per square mile (5/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 39.83% White, 58.95% Black or African American, 0.17% Native American, 0.16% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.29% from other races, and 0.58% from two or more races. 0.91% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,415 households out of which 36.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.60% were married couples living together, 22.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.20% were non-families. 26.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.19.
In the county the population was spread out with 29.60% under the age of 18, 9.10% from 18 to 24, 26.70% from 25 to 44, 21.10% from 45 to 64, and 13.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females there were 89.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.60 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $25,807, and the median income for a family was $31,875. Males had a median income of $28,493 versus $19,363 for females. The per capita income for the county was $12,661. About 22.20% of families and 26.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.00% of those under age 18 and 26.70% of those age 65 or over.
Government and infrastructure.
The Farquhar Cattle Ranch, a former Alabama Department of Corrections facility for men, was in an unincorporated area of the county, about east of Greensboro.
Tourism.
Greensboro, the county seat, is home to the 'Safe House Museum'. On March 21, 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. attended a meeting at Greensboro's St. Matthew Church, and then spent the night in this house where he sought refuge from the Ku Klux Klan. The museum reveals the struggle for equality for African Americans in Alabama, and its curator, Ms. Theresa Burroughs, was both a family friend of King, and a foot soldier in the Civil Rights Movement.
Greensboro is also home to a large number of antebellum-era houses and churches, including some that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places such as Glencairn and Magnolia Grove.

</doc>
<doc id="77856" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77856" title="Mary Poppins (film)">
Mary Poppins (film)

Mary Poppins is a 1964 American musical fantasy film directed by Robert Stevenson and produced by Walt Disney, with songs written and composed by the Sherman Brothers. The screenplay is by Bill Walsh and Don DaGradi, loosely based on P. L. Travers' book series "Mary Poppins". The film, which combines live-action and animation, stars Julie Andrews in the role of Mary Poppins who visits a dysfunctional family in London and employs her unique brand of lifestyle to improve the family's dynamic. Dick Van Dyke, David Tomlinson, and Glynis Johns are featured in supporting roles. The film was shot entirely at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank, California.
"Mary Poppins" was released on August 27, 1964 to universal acclaim, receiving a total of thirteen Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture—an unsurpassed record for any other film released by Walt Disney Studios—and won five; Best Actress for Andrews, Best Film Editing, Best Original Music Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Original Song for "Chim Chim Cher-ee". In 2013, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
Plot.
In Edwardian London, 1910, Cockney one-man band Bert is entertaining a crowd when he senses a change in the wind. Afterwards, he directly addresses the audience and gives them a tour of Cherry Tree Lane, stopping outside the home of the Banks family. George Banks returns home from his job at the bank to learn from his wife Winifred that their hired nanny, Katie Nanna, has left their service after his children, Jane and Michael, ran away "again". They are returned shortly after by the local constable, who reveals that the children were chasing a lost kite. The children ask their father to help build a better kite, but he dismisses them. Taking it upon himself to hire a nanny, George advertises for a stern, no-nonsense nanny. Jane and Michael present their own advertisement for a kinder, sweeter nanny, but George rips up the letter and throws the scraps in the fireplace, which magically float up and out into the air.
The next day, a queue of elderly, sour-faced nannies appear outside. However, a strong gust of wind blows the nannies away, and Jane and Michael witness a young nanny descend from the sky using her umbrella. Presenting herself to George, Mary Poppins calmly produces the children’s now restored advertisement and agrees with its requests, but promises the astonished banker she will be firm with his children. As George puzzles over the ad’s return, Mary hires herself and meets the children, baffling them with her behaviour and bottomless carpet bag. She helps the children to tidy their nursery through song, before heading out for a walk in the park.
Outside, they meet Bert who now works as a screever, drawing chalk sketches on the pavement. Mary uses her magic to transport the group into one of the drawings, which becomes an animated countryside setting. While the children ride on a nearby carousel, Mary Poppins and Bert go on a leisurely stroll and are served tea by a quartet of penguin waiters. Mary enchants the carousel horses, which leave the carousel and rescue an Irish fox from a fox-hunt. They participate in a horse race which she wins. When asked to describe her victory, Mary announces the nonsense word “Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious”. On another outing, the four meet Mary's jovial Uncle Albert who has floated up in the air due to his uncontrollable laughter. They join him for a tea party on the ceiling, telling jokes.
George becomes increasingly bothered by the cheery atmosphere of his family and considers firing Mary Poppins. Mary inverts his attempt, instead convincing him to take the children to the bank for a day. George takes Jane and Michael to the bank, where they meet his employers, Mr. Dawes Sr. and his son. Dawes aggressively attempts to have Michael invest his tuppence in the bank, snatching the money from him. Michael demands it back, causing other customers to misinterpret and all demand their money back, causing a bank run. Jane and Michael flee the bank, getting lost in the East End until they run into Bert, now a chimney sweep. He escorts them home, suggesting their father does not hate them but has his own troubles to deal with. The three and Mary venture onto the roof where they have a dance number with other chimney sweeps until George returns home. George receives a phone call from his employers, telling him to meet them later for disciplinary action. George speaks with Bert who tells him that while he needs to work, he should spend more time with his children before they grow up. Jane and Michael give their father Michael’s tuppence in the hope to make amends.
George walks through London to the bank, where he is given a humiliating cashiering and is dismissed. Looking to the tuppence for words, he raucously blurts out, "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious!", tells one of Uncle Albert's jokes the children originally told him, and happily heads home. Dawes mulls over the joke, but finally "gets" it, and floats up into the air, laughing. The next day, the wind changes, meaning Mary must leave. A happier George is found at home, having fixed his children’s kite, and takes the family out to fly it. In the park, the Banks meet Mr. Dawes Jr, who reveals that his father died happily laughing from the joke and re-employs George as a junior partner. With her work done, Mary flies away with Bert bidding her farewell, telling her not to stay away too long.
Production.
Development.
The first book in the "Mary Poppins" book series was the main basis for the movie. According to the 40th Anniversary DVD release of the film in 2004, Walt Disney's daughters fell in love with the "Mary Poppins" books, and made him promise to make a film based on them. Disney first attempted to purchase the film rights to "Mary Poppins" from P. L. Travers as early as 1938 but was rebuffed because Travers did not believe a film version of her books would do justice to her creation. In addition, Disney was known at the time primarily as a producer of cartoons and had yet to produce any major live-action work. For more than 20 years, Disney periodically made efforts to convince Travers to allow him to make a "Poppins" film. He finally succeeded in 1961, although Travers demanded and got script approval rights. The Sherman Brothers composed the music score and were also involved in the film's development, suggesting the setting be changed from the 1930s to the Edwardian era. Pre-production and composing the songs took about two years.
Travers was an adviser to the production. However, she disapproved of the dilution of the harsher aspects of Mary Poppins' character, felt ambivalent about the music, and so hated the use of animation that she ruled out any further adaptations of the later "Mary Poppins" novels. She objected to a number of elements that actually made it into the film. Rather than original songs, she wanted the soundtrack to feature known standards of the Edwardian period in which the story is set. She also objected to the animated sequence. Disney overruled her, citing contract stipulations that he had final say on the finished print. Much of the Travers-Disney correspondence is part of the Travers collection of papers in the Mitchell Library of New South Wales, Australia. The relationship between Travers and Disney is detailed in "Mary Poppins She Wrote", a biography of Travers, by Valerie Lawson. The biography is the basis for two documentaries on Travers, "The Real Mary Poppins", and Lisa Matthews' "The Shadow of Mary Poppins". Their relationship during the development of the film was also dramatized in the 2013 film, "Saving Mr. Banks".
Casting.
Julie Andrews, who was making her movie acting debut after a successful stage career, got the prime role of Mary Poppins soon after she was passed over by Jack L. Warner and replaced with Audrey Hepburn for the role of Eliza Doolittle in his screen version of "My Fair Lady", even though Andrews had originated the role on Broadway. When Walt Disney first approached Andrews about taking on the role, Andrews was three months pregnant and therefore was not sure she should take it. Disney assured her that the crew would be fine with waiting to begin filming until after she had given birth so that she could play the part. Julie Andrews also provided the voice in two other sections of the film: during "A Spoonful of Sugar," she provided the whistling harmony for the robin, and she was also one of the Pearly singers during "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious." David Tomlinson, besides playing Mr. Banks, provided the voice of Mary's talking umbrella and numerous other voice-over parts (including that of Admiral Boom's first mate). During the Jolly Holiday sequence, the three singing Cockney geese were all voiced by Marni Nixon, a regular aural substitute for actresses with substandard singing voices. Nixon would later provide the singing voice for Audrey Hepburn in "My Fair Lady" and play one of Julie Andrews' fellow nuns in "The Sound of Music". Andrews later beat Hepburn for the Best Actress Award at the Golden Globes for their respective roles. Andrews would also win the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role. Hepburn did not receive a nomination. Richard Sherman, one of the songwriters, also voiced a penguin as well as one of the Pearlies.
Disney cast Dick Van Dyke in the key supporting role of Bert after seeing his work on "The Dick Van Dyke Show". After winning the role of Bert, Van Dyke lobbied to also play the senior Mr. Dawes, but Disney originally felt he was too young for the part. Van Dyke eventually won Disney over after a screen test. Although he is fondly remembered for this film, Van Dyke's attempt at a cockney accent is regarded as one of the worst film accents in history, cited as an example by actors since as something that they wish to avoid. In a 2003 poll by "Empire" magazine of the worst film accents of all time he came second. Van Dyke claims that his accent coach was the Irish J. Pat O'Malley, who "didn't do an accent any better than I did".
Filming.
Filming took place between May and September 1963, with post-production and animation taking another 11 months.
The film changed the book story line in a number of places. For example, Mary, when approaching the house, controlled the wind rather than the other way around. As another example, the father, rather than the mother, interviewed Mary for the nanny position. A number of other changes were necessary to condense the story into feature length. In the movie, there are only two Banks children, Jane and Michael. The satirical and mysterious aspects of the original book gave way to a cheerful and "Disney-fied" tone. Mary Poppins' character as portrayed by Andrews in the film is somewhat less vain and more sympathetic towards the children compared to the rather cold and intimidating nanny of the original book. Bert, as played by Van Dyke, was a composite of several characters from Travers' stories. Travers demanded that any suggestions of romance between Mary and Bert be eliminated, so lyrics were written for "Jolly Holiday" that clearly indicated that their friendship was purely platonic. (Some subtle hints of romance, however, did remain in the finished film.)
Music.
Buena Vista Records released the original motion picture soundtrack on vinyl and reel-to-reel tape. Due to time constraints, some songs were edited (such as "Step in Time" and "Jolly Holiday", "A Spoonful of Sugar"), while songs also featured introductory passages ("Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious") or completed endings ("Sister Sufragette", "Fidelity Fiduciary Bank", "A Man Has Dreams"). The "Overture" also featured "Jolly Holiday", omitted from the opening credits presentation and later re-released under the Walt Disney Records label, while "Jolly Holiday" and "A Spoonful of Sugar" would be restored to their theatrical lengths. Written by Richard and Robert Sherman, the songs were inspired by Edwardian British music hall music. The score won two Grammy Awards and two Academy Awards.
Walt Disney Records re-issued the soundtrack in 1997, including 16-minute track of unreleased songs and demo versions. In 2004, as part of the 40th Anniversary (also called Special Edition), a 28-track disc (as part of a two-disc set) was released. In 2014 (the 50th anniversary of the film's release), the soundtrack was released in a 3-CD edition as part of the series; this edition includes demos of many "lost" tracks.
Deleted songs.
A number of other songs were written for the film by the Sherman Brothers and either rejected or cut for time. Richard Sherman, on the 2004 DVD release, indicated that more than 30 songs were written at various stages of the film's development. No cast recordings of any of these songs have been released to the public, only demos or later performances done by the songwriters — with the exception of the rooftop reprise of "Chim Chim Cher-ee" and the "smoke staircase yodel" mentioned below.
The Compass Sequence, a precursor to "Jolly Holiday", was to be a multiple-song sequence. A number of possible musical components have been identified:
Release.
"Mary Poppins" premiered August 27, 1964 at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles. Travers was not extended an invitation to the film's premiere, but managed to obtain one from a Disney executive. It was at the after-party that Richard Sherman recalled her walking up to Disney and loudly announcing that the animated sequence had to go. Disney responded, "Pamela, the ship has sailed," and walked away. The film grossed between $31 and 33 million during its initial run. The film was re-released theatrically in 1973 and earned an estimated $9 million in North American rentals. It was released once more in 1980 and earned another $14 million, and achieved a total lifetime gross of over $102 million. The film was very profitable for Disney. Made on an estimated budget of $4.4 to 6 million, it was reported by Cobbett Steinberg to be the most profitable film of 1965, earning a net profit of $28.5 million. Walt Disney used his huge profits from the film to purchase land in central Florida and finance the construction of Walt Disney World.
Home media.
"Mary Poppins" was first released in the early 1980s on VHS, Betamax, CED and laserdisc. In 1994, 1997 and 1999, it was re-released three times as part of the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection. In 1998, this film became Disney's first DVD. In 2000, it was released on VHS and DVD as part of the Gold Classic Collection. In 2004, it had a 2-Disc DVD release in a Digitally Restored 40th Anniversary Edition as well as its final issue in the VHS Format. The film's audio track featured an "Enhanced Home Theater Mix" consisting of replaced sound effects (to make the soundtrack more "modern") and improved fidelity and mixing and some enhanced music (this version was also shown on 2006-2012 ABC Family airings of the movie.) On January 27, 2009, the film was released on DVD again as a 45th anniversary edition, with more language tracks and special features (though the film's "Enhanced Home Theater Mix" was not included.) Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on Blu-ray as the "50th Anniversary Edition" on December 10, 2013.
Reception.
The film received universal acclaim by film critics. Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 100% of critics gave the film a "fresh" rating, based on 44 reviews with an average score of 8.3/10. The site's consensus says, "A lavish modern fairy tale celebrated for its amazing special effects, catchy songs, and Julie Andrews's legendary performance in the title role."
"Variety" praised the film's musical sequences and the performances of Julie Andrews and Dick Van Dyke, in particular. "Time" lauded the film, stating, "The sets are luxuriant, the songs lilting, the scenario witty but impeccably sentimental, and the supporting cast only a pinfeather short of perfection."
Critic Drew Casper summarized the impact of "Mary Poppins" in 2011:
Legacy.
"Mary Poppins" is widely considered to be one of the greatest films of all time and Walt Disney's "crowning achievement". It was the only film of Disney's to garner a "Best Picture" nomination at the Oscars in his lifetime.
Never at ease with the handling of her property by Disney or the way she felt she had been treated, Travers would never again agree to another Poppins/Disney adaptation. So fervent was Travers' dislike of the Disney adaptation and of the way she felt she had been treated during the production, that when producer Cameron Mackintosh approached her about the stage musical in the 1990s, she acquiesced on the condition that only English-born writers and no one from the film production were to be directly involved with creating the stage musical.
Sequel.
On September 14, 2015, it was reported a new film was in development by Disney. The film will take place 20 years after the first, featuring a standalone narrative based on the remaining seven books in the series. Rob Marshall has been hired to direct, while John DeLuca and Marc Platt will serve as producers. On April 25, 2016, Disney confirmed that Emily Blunt and Lin-Manuel Miranda will star in the sequel.

</doc>
<doc id="77857" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77857" title="Jackson County, Alabama">
Jackson County, Alabama

Jackson County is the northeasternmost county in the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 53,227. The county seat is Scottsboro. It was named for Andrew Jackson, general in the United States Army and afterward President of the United States of America. Jackson County is a prohibition or dry county, however three cities within the county (Bridgeport, Scottsboro, and Stevenson) are wet.
Jackson County comprises the Scottsboro, AL Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area.
History.
Jackson County was established on December 13, 1819.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (%) is water. It is the fifth-largest county in Alabama by total area. Much of it is located in the Appalachians.
Of special interest is Russell Cave National Monument, which is located in Doran Cove, approximately 5 miles west of the town of Bridgeport. Russell Cave is an important archaeological site that was excavated in 1956 by the Smithsonian Institution and the National Geographic Society. An article in the October 1956 issue of National Geographic Magazine proudly proclaims: "Life 8,000 Years Ago Uncovered in an Alabama Cave." The article was written by Carl F. Miller, the Expedition Leader and is on pages 542-558. Russell Cave was declared a National Monument in May 1961 by President John F. Kennedy. The Monument consists of of land donated by the National Geographic Society.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 53,926 people, 21,615 households, and 15,822 families residing in the county. The population density was 50 people per square mile (19/km2). There were 24,168 housing units at an average density of 22 per square mile (9/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 91.89% White(non-Hispanic), 3.74% Black or African American, 1.75% Native American, 0.23% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.36% from other races, and 2.00% from two or more races. 1.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
In 2000, the largest ancestry groups in Jackson County were English 69.1%, Scots-Irish 5.21%, Scottish 4.67%, and African 3.74%.
2010.
According to the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau:
There were 21,615 households, out of which 31.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.00% were married couples living together, 10.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.80% were non-families. Nearly 24.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47, and the average family size was 2.92.
In the county, the population was spread out with 24.20% under the age of 18, 8.30% from 18 to 24, 28.70% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 13.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.00 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $32,020, and the median income for a family was $38,082. Males had a median income of $29,777 versus $20,990 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,000. About 10.30% of families and 13.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.20% of those under age 18 and 21.00% of those age 65 or over.
Politics.
While most of North Alabama has become solidly Republican, Jackson County remains a stronghold of the Democratic Party (which is not to say the residents are liberals; see Dixiecrat and Southern Democrat). Up until November 2012, there are no elected Republicans in local Jackson County Government. In that year's general election, two Republicans were elected to the Jackson County Commission—the first Republicans to serve on the Commission since Reconstruction. There is now an all Republican delegation in Jackson County. Tommy Hanes and Ritchie Whorton represent the county in the Alabama State House of Representatives. Steve Livingston serves Jackson County in the Alabama State Senate. In the, 2004 Presidential Election, Jackson County voted for Republican George W. Bush over Democrat John Kerry. It was the first time Jackson County voters chose a Republican presidential candidate over a Democrat since 1972.
The trending Republican has continued since 2004. In 2008 John McCain won the county with 67.7% of the vote. In 2010 Republican gubernatorial candidate Robert J. Bentley received 56% of the vote, Republican House candidate Mo Brooks received 55% of the vote, and incumbent Senator Richard Shelby received 70% in the county. Although in 2010 Democratic politicians continued to win in Jackson on some of the more local races.
The current Jackson County Commission is headed by Chairman Matthew Hodges.

</doc>
<doc id="77860" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77860" title="John Entwistle">
John Entwistle

John Alec Entwistle (9 October 1944 – 27 June 2002) was an English musician, songwriter, singer, film and music producer, who was best known as the original bass guitarist for the English rock band The Who. He was the only member of the band to have formal musical training. His aggressive lead sound influenced many rock bass players. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of The Who in 1990.
Entwistle's instrumental approach used pentatonic lead lines, and a then-unusual treble-rich sound ("full treble, full volume") created by roundwound RotoSound steel bass strings. He was nicknamed "The Ox" and "Thunderfingers," the latter because his digits became a blur across the four-string fretboard.
In 2011, he was voted the greatest bassist of all time in a "Rolling Stone" reader's poll. According to the The Biography Channel, Entwistle is considered by many to be the best bass guitarist that ever lived, and considered to have done for the bass what Jimi Hendrix did for the guitar.
Early life.
John Alec Entwistle was born on 9 October 1944 in Chiswick, a suburb of London. He was an only child. His father, Herbert, played trumpet and his mother, Maud (29 November 1922 – 4 March 2011), played piano. His parents' marriage failed soon after he was born, and he was mostly raised by his mother at his grandparents house in South Acton. Divorce was uncommon in the 1940s, and this contributed to Entwistle becoming reserved and socialising little.
His musical career began aged 7, when he started piano lessons. He did not enjoy the experience and after joining Acton County Grammar School aged 11, switched to the trumpet, moving to French horn when he joined the Middlesex School's Symphony Orchestra. He met Pete Townshend in the second year of school, and the two formed a trad jazz band, The Confederates. The group only played one gig together, before they decided that rock 'n' roll was a more attractive prospect. Entwistle, in particular, was having difficulty hearing his trumpet with bands, and decided to switch to playing guitar, but due to his large fingers, and also his fondness for the low guitar tones of Duane Eddy, he decided to take up the bass. He made his own instrument at home, and soon attracted the attention of Roger Daltrey, who had been the year above Entwistle at Acton County, but had since left to work in sheet metal. Daltrey was aware of Entwistle from school, and asked him to join as bassist for his band, The Detours.
Early career.
After joining the Detours, Entwistle played a major role in encouraging Pete Townshend's budding talent on the guitar, and insisting that Townshend be admitted into the band as well. Eventually, Roger Daltrey fired all the members of his band with the exception of Entwistle, Townshend and the drummer, Doug Sandom, a semi-pro player who was several years older than the others. Roger Daltrey relinquished the role of guitarist to Pete Townshend in 1963, instead becoming frontman and lead singer. The band considered several changes of name, and finally settling on the name The Who while Entwistle was still working as a tax clerk (temporarily performing as the High Numbers for 4 months in 1964). When the band decided that the blond Roger Daltrey needed to stand out more from the others, Entwistle dyed his naturally light brown hair black, and it remained so until the early 1980s.
Around 1963, Entwistle played in a London band called The Initials for a short while; the band split when a planned resident engagement in Spain fell through.
In 1967, Entwistle married his childhood sweetheart Alison Wise and bought a large semi-detached home in Acton, filling it with all sorts of extraordinary artefacts, ranging from suits of armour to a tarantula spider. His eccentricity and taste for the bizarre was to remain with him throughout his life, and when he finally moved out of the city in 1978, to Stow-on-the-Wold in Gloucestershire, his 17-bedroom mansion, Quarwood, resembled a museum. It also housed one of the largest guitar collections belonging to any rock musician.
Entwistle picked up two nicknames during his career as a musician. He was nicknamed "The Ox" because of his strong constitution and seeming ability to "Eat, drink or do more than the rest of them." He was also later nicknamed "Thunderfingers". Bill Wyman, bass guitarist for The Rolling Stones, described him as "the quietest man in private but the loudest man on stage". Entwistle was one of the first to make use of Marshall stacks in an attempt to hear himself over the noise of his bandmates, who famously leapt and moved about on the stage, with Pete Townshend and Keith Moon smashing their instruments on numerous occasions (Moon even used explosives in his drum kit during one memorable television performance on the "Smother Brothers Comedy Hour"). Townshend later remarked that Entwistle started using Marshall amplification to hear himself over drummer Keith Moon's rapid-fire drumming style, and Townshend himself also had to use them just to be heard over Entwistle. They both continued expanding and experimenting with their rigs, until they were both using twin stacks with new experimental prototype 200 watt amps, at a time when most bands used 50–100 watt amplifiers with single cabinets. All of this quickly gained The Who a reputation for being "the loudest band on the planet", a point well proven when they famously reached 126 decibels at a 1976 concert in London, listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as the loudest rock concert in history. The band had a strong influence at the time on their contemporaries' choice of equipment, with Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience both following suit. Although they pioneered and directly contributed to the development of the "classic" Marshall sound (at this point their equipment was being built/tweaked to their personal specifications), they only used Marshall equipment for a couple of years. Entwistle eventually switched to using a Sound City rig, with Pete Townshend following suit later as well. Townshend points out that Jimi Hendrix, their new label mate, was influenced beyond just the band's volume. Both Entwistle and Townshend had begun experimenting with feedback from the amplifiers in the mid-1960s, and Hendrix did not begin destroying his instruments until after he had witnessed The Who's "auto-destructive art".
Entwistle's wry and sometimes dark sense of humour clashed at times with Pete Townshend's more introspective, intellectual work. Although he wrote songs on every Who album except for "Quadrophenia", he was frustrated at Townshend not allowing him to sing them himself. As he said, "I got a couple (of songs) on per album but my problem was that I wanted to sing the songs and not let Roger sing them." This was a large part of the reason that he became the first member of the band to release a solo record, "Smash Your Head Against the Wall" (1971) with help from Keith Moon, Jerry Shirley, Vivian Stanshall, Neil Innes and The Who's Roadie Dave "Cyrano" Langston.
He was the only member of the band to have had formal musical training. In addition to bass guitar, he contributed backing vocals and performed on the French horn (heard on "Pictures of Lily"), trumpet, bugle, and jaw harp, and on some occasions lead vocalist on his compositions. He layered several horns to create the brass section as heard on songs such as "", among others, while recording The Who's studio albums, and for concerts, arranged a horn section to perform with the band.
While Entwistle was known for being the quietest member of The Who, he in fact often exerted major influences on the rest of the band. For instance, Entwistle was the first member of the band to wear a Union Jack waistcoat. This piece of clothing later became one of Pete Townshend's signature garments. 
Entwistle designed the cover art for the band's 1975 album "The Who By Numbers" and in a 1996 interview remarked that it cost £30 to create while the "Quadrophenia" cover, designed by Pete Townshend, had cost £16,000.
Entwistle also experimented throughout his career with "Bi-amping," where the high and low ends of the bass sound are sent through separate signal paths, allowing for more control over the output. At one point his rig became so loaded down with speaker cabinets and processing gear that it was dubbed "Little Manhattan," in reference to the towering, skyscraper-like stacks, racks and blinking lights.
Solo career.
In 1971 Entwistle became the first member to release a solo album, "Smash Your Head Against the Wall", which earned him a cult following in the US for fans of his brand of black humour. Other solo studio albums followed: "Whistle Rymes" (1972), "Rigor Mortis Sets In" (1973), "Mad Dog" (1975), "Too Late the Hero" (1981) and "The Rock" (1996). In 1974, he compiled "Odds & Sods", a collection of unreleased Who material. The band was preoccupied with recording "The Who By Numbers" during the spring of 1975 and did not do any touring for most of the year, so Entwistle spent the summer performing solo concerts. He also fronted the John Entwistle Band on US club tours during the 1990s, and appeared with Ringo Starr's All Starr Band in 1995. A talented artist, John Entwistle held regular exhibitions of his paintings, many of them featuring The Who.
Late career.
In 1990, Entwistle toured with The Best, a short-lived supergroup which included Keith Emerson, Joe Walsh, Jeff "Skunk" Baxter and Simon Phillips. Towards the end of his career, he formed The John Entwistle Project with longtime friend, drummer Steve Luongo, and guitarist Mark Hitt, both formerly of Rat Race Choir. This evolved into "The John Entwistle Band", with Godfrey Townsend replacing Mark Hitt on guitar and joining harmony vocals. In 1996, the band went on the "Left for Dead" tour with Alan St. Jon joining on keyboards. After Entwistle toured with The Who for "Quadrophenia" in 1996–97, the John Entwistle Band set off on the "Left for Dead – the Sequel" tour in late 1998, now with Gordon Cotten on keyboards. After this second venture, the band released an album of highlights from the tour, called "Left for Live" and a studio album "Music from Van-Pires" in 2000. The album featured lost demos of Who drummer Keith Moon together with newly recorded parts by the band. In 1995 Entwistle also toured and recorded with Ringo Starr in one of the incarnations of Ringo's All-Starr Band. This one also featured Billy Preston, Randy Bachman, and Mark Farner. In this ensemble, he played and sang "Boris the Spider" as his Who showpiece, along with "My Wife". Toward the end of his career he used a Status Graphite Buzzard Bass, which he designed. From 1999 to early 2002, he played as part of The Who. Entwistle also played at Woodstock '99, being the only performer there to have taken the stage at the original Woodstock. As a side project, he played bass in a country-rock album project of original songs called The Pioneers, with Mickey Wynne on lead guitar, Ron Magness on rhythm guitar and keyboards, Roy Michaels, Andre Beeka on vocals and John Delgado playing drums. The album was released on Voiceprint Records. Shortly before his death, John Entwistle had agreed to play some US dates with the band including Nashville's Grand Ole Opry, following his final upcoming tour with The Who.
In 2001, he played in Alan Parsons' Beatles tribute show "A Walk Down Abbey Road". The show also featured Ann Wilson of Heart, Todd Rundgren, David Pack of Ambrosia, Godfrey Townsend, Steve Luongo, and John Beck. That year he also played with The Who at The Concert for New York City. He also joined forces again with The John Entwistle Band for an 8-gig tour. This time Chris Clark played keyboards. In January–February 2002 John Entwistle played his last concerts with The Who in a handful of dates in England, the last being on 8 February at London's Royal Albert Hall. In late 2002, an expanded 2-CD "Left for Live Deluxe" was released, highlighting the John Entwistle Band performances.
Death.
Entwistle died in Room 658 at the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas on 27 June 2002, one day before the scheduled first show of The Who's 2002 United States tour. He had gone to bed that night with a stripper/groupie, Alycen Rowse, who woke at 10 a.m. to find Entwistle cold and unresponsive. The Clark County medical examiner determined that his death was due to a heart attack induced by cocaine. His funeral was held at St Edward's Church in Stow-on-the-Wold, Gloucestershire, England, on 10 July 2002. He was cremated and his ashes were buried privately. A memorial service was held on 24 October at St. Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square, London. Entwistle's huge collection of guitars and basses was auctioned at Sotheby's in London by his son, Christopher, to meet anticipated taxes on his father's estate.
On Pete Townshend's Web site, Townshend and Roger Daltrey published a tribute, saying, "The Ox has left the building — we've lost another great friend. Thanks for your support and love. Pete and Roger."
Entwistle's mansion in Stow-on-the-Wold in the Cotswolds and some of his personal effects were later sold off to meet the demands of the Inland Revenue; coincidentally, he had worked for the agency from 1962-1963 as a tax officer before being demoted to filing clerk, prior to joining The Who.
One aspect of John Entwistle's life emerged after his death that came as a surprise even to those closest to him, including the members of The Who. "It wasn't until the day of his funeral that I discovered that he'd spent most of his life as a Freemason," said Pete Townshend.
Welsh-born bassist Pino Palladino, who had previously played on several of Townshend's solo records, took over for John Entwistle on stage when The Who resumed their postponed United States tour on 1 July 2002. Pete Townshend and Roger Daltrey spoke at length about their reaction to John Entwistle's death. Some of their comments can be found on "The Who Live in Boston" DVD.
On the opening night of their "Vapor Trails" tour, which began in Hartford, Connecticut on 28 June 2002 (the night after Entwistle's death), Geddy Lee of Rush dedicated the band's performance of the song "Between Sun and Moon" to John Entwistle.
Oasis played a version of "My Generation" during their set at T in the Park on Saturday 13 July 2002 as a tribute to John Entwistle.
Technique.
Entwistle's playing technique incorporated fingerstyle, plectrum, tapping, and the use of harmonics. He changed his style between songs and even during songs to alter the sound he produced. His fingering technique involved pressing down on the string hard and releasing it to produce a trebly, twangy sound. He changed his thumb position from pick-up to the E string and occasionally even positioning his thumb near the pick-up. His plectrum technique involved holding the plectrum between his thumb and forefinger, with the rest of his fingers outstretched for balance.
The Who's studio recordings seldom did justice to Entwistle's playing, in part because he was better heard in concert, where he and Pete Townshend frequently exchanged roles, with Entwistle providing rapid melodic lines and Townshend anchoring the song with rhythmic chord work. At the same time, Townshend noted that Entwistle provided the true rhythmic timekeeping in the band, while Keith Moon, with his flourishes around the kit, was more like a keyboard player. In 1989, Entwistle pointed out that, by modern standards, "The Who haven't got a proper bass player."
Entwistle also developed what he called a "typewriter" approach to playing the bass. It involved positioning his right hand over the strings so all four fingers could be used to tap percussively on the strings, causing them to strike the fretboard with a distinctive twangy sound. This gave him the ability to play three or four strings at once, or to use several fingers on a single string. It allowed him to create passages that were both percussive and melodic. This method should not be confused with tapping or slapping, and in fact predates these techniques. Modern players such as Ryan Martinie of Mudvayne have used use similar techniques. Entwistle can be seen using this technique in Mike Gordon's film, "Rising Low". Notable in his left-hand technique was his use of slides, positioning his left hand for octaves, and his use of the pentatonic when playing with The Who.
Entwistle was notorious for the extremely high volume that he played bass with, going so far as to rig pick-ups to each string on his instruments. This led to him developing hearing loss, similar to Townshend. Although not as public about his problems as Townshend, he reputedly had to rely on lip reading to understand speech in his later years. Randy Bachman of Bachman-Turner Overdrive claimed that towards the end of his life, Entwistle mostly played by feeling the rush of air from his giant amp stacks.
Songwriting.
While Townshend emerged as The Who's songwriter-in-chief, Entwistle began making distinctive contributions to the band's catalogue, beginning with "Whiskey Man" and "Boris the Spider" on the "A Quick One" album in 1966, continuing with "Doctor, Doctor" and "Someone's Coming" (1967); "Silas Stingy" from "The Who Sell Out" (1967); "Dr. Jekyll & Mr. Hyde" (1968); and "Heaven And Hell", with which The Who opened their formidable live shows between 1968 and 1970. John Entwistle wrote "Cousin Kevin" and "Fiddle About" for The Who's 1969 album "Tommy" because Pete Townshend specifically requested Entwistle to write 'nasty songs' that he felt uncomfortable with. "My Wife", Entwistle's driving, comedic song about marital strife from 1971′s "Who's Next", also became a popular stage number. He wrote "Success Story" for "The Who By Numbers" (1975), for which he also drew the illustration on the album cover; "Had Enough", "905", and "Trick of the Light" for "Who Are You" (1978); "The Quiet One" and "You" for "Face Dances" (1981); and "It's Your Turn", "Dangerous" and "One at a Time" for "It's Hard" (1982), his final album with The Who.
Artistic background.
Between 1996 and 2002, Entwistle attended dozens of art openings in his honour. Always gracious, he took the time to chat with each collector, personalising their art with a quote and a sketch of "Boris". In early 2002 John Entwistle finished what was his last drawing. "Eyes Wide Shut" represented a new style for Entwistle. Featuring Jimi Hendrix, Pete Townshend, Jimmy Page and Eric Clapton, John Entwistle's style had evolved from simple line drawings and caricatures to a more lifelike representation of his subjects. He was more confident and relaxed with his art and ready to share that with his collectors.
John Entwistle wrote this on one of his pictures:
"Now...! I'm still the Bass Guitarist. If you're reading this Bio at a show – don't forget to wave – I'm the one on the left. If you're reading this at an Art Show – Help support a starving Artist BUY SOMETHING!"
Influence.
Entwistle identified his influences as a combination of his school training on French horn, trumpet, and piano (giving his fingers strength and dexterity). Musicians who influenced him included rock & roll guitarists Duane Eddy and Gene Vincent, and American soul and R&B bassists such as James Jamerson. In turn, Entwistle has been a considerable influence on the playing styles and sounds used by generations of bass players that have followed him, including Geezer Butler, Steve Harris, Matt Freeman, Krist Novoselic, Cliff Burton, Ian Hill, Geddy Lee, Billy Sheehan, Victor Wooten, Tom Petersson, Sam Rivers, and Chris Squire. Entwistle continues to top 'best ever bass player' polls in musicians magazines. In 2000, "Guitar" magazine named him "Bassist of the Millennium" in a readers' poll. J. D. Considine ranked Entwistle No. 9 on his list of "Top 50 Bass Players". He was named the second best bassist on "Creem Magazine"'s 1974 Reader Poll Results. In 2011, a "Rolling Stone" reader poll selected him as the No.1 bassist of all time.
Equipment.
Entwistle collaborated with bass guitar manufacturers such as Alembic and Warwick.

</doc>
<doc id="77861" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77861" title="Tatooine">
Tatooine

Tatooine is a fictional desert planet that serves as the setting for many key scenes throughout the "Star Wars" saga, appearing in every "Star Wars" film except "The Empire Strikes Back" and "". Being the home of both Anakin Skywalker and Luke Skywalker, it is arguably the most iconic planet in the "Star Wars" universe; and the shots of Luke Skywalker gazing at a Tatooinian sunset are arguably the most famous images of the entire saga. 
Description.
Tatooine orbits two main sequence binary stars and it has three moons, Ghomrassen, Guermessa and Chenini. Its G-type twin stars ( I and II) heat its surface, making water and shade hard to come by. The planet's indigenous lifeforms—such as the Womp rat, bantha, Sarlacc, and Krayt Dragon—are well-adapted to its arid climate, but human settlers often become moisture farmers and live in subterranean dwellings in order to survive. The planet's lack of resources, brutal heat, and decentralized population have made governing the planet nearly impossible.
The planet fell into the clutches of the Hutts, a clan of gangsters and crime lords. Since Tatooine was beyond the reach of the Galactic Republic, the Hutts presided over the lawless planet with little outside interference. When the Galactic Empire subsumed the Old Republic, the new regime established only a token presence on Tatooine, which left Jabba the Hutt’s reign unchallenged. Jabba remained the assumed ruler of Tatooine until his death in the Battle of Carkoon.
Its name is derived from a Southern village in Tunisia, near to where George Lucas filmed various movie scenes.
Locations.
Anchorhead.
Anchorhead is a settlement located a few miles east of the Lars family home, south of the bustling spaceport of Mos Eisley, and primarily consists of moisture farmers.
Bestine.
Bestine, the "capital" of Tatooine, is situated far west of Mos Eisley near the south-western Dune Sea. It was also one of the earliest settlements on the planet but never thrived economically, sharing the same problems as many other settlements on the dry world. The Galactic Empire eventually established its base of operations here and placed its regional governor in the city's Main Hall. It is featured prominently in "".
Dune Sea.
The Dune Sea is a huge sandy desert, near the cities of Anchorhead, Mos Eisley and Tosche Station. It is inhabited solely by Tusken Raiders, Jawas, wraids, dewbacks and the occasional Krayt dragon. Moisture farmers often have many moisture vaporators located in the Dune Sea to collect the scarce water vapor from the air.
Great Pit of Carkoon.
The Great Pit of Carkoon is located within the Dune Sea. It is a large hollow in the desert sand created by the Sarlacc, a large omnivorous creature that uses the pit to capture prey. The Great Pit of Carkoon is the site of a skirmish that takes place between Luke Skywalker and the forces of Jabba the Hutt. The Hutt crime lord and most of his minions were killed during the battle.
Jabba's Palace.
Jabba's Palace is located in the desert known as the Dune Sea and was home to the gangster high boss and crime lord, Jabba the Hutt. It is introduced as the main setting of the beginning of "Return of the Jedi". Jabba's palace is also the main setting in "Tales From Jabba's Palace", edited by Kevin J. Anderson, as well as a playable area in the video games ', ', ', "Lego Star Wars II", ' and "". The palace was originally a monastery built by the mysterious B'omarr monks, who still inhabit parts of the palace. Jabba's Palace is very much infamous for bounty hunters, mercenaries, rogues, thieves, and many other known assassins to claim rewards.
Jundland Wastes.
The Jundland Wastes occupy most of Tatooine's temperate area, a rocky region known for its numerous cliffs and a multitude of hidden dangers. Obi-Wan Kenobi lived in a small dwelling on the edge of the Jundland Wastes after he took the infant Luke Skywalker to live on a moisture farm with relatives to hide the boy from Darth Vader. This area is also a level in the video games ', ' and "".
Moisture farms.
Moisture farms are small agricultural settlements found in the deserts of Tatooine that utilize a large number of moisture collecting devices spread over a wide area to harvest water from the relatively dry air of the planet. Luke Skywalker spent his first twenty years living with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru on a moisture farm. Moisture farmers harvest water vapour from the atmosphere, and use it to grow crops in underground hydroponic labs.
Mos Eisley.
Mos Eisley is a spaceport town. In "Star Wars", Obi-Wan Kenobi described Mos Eisley as a "wretched hive of scum and villainy."
It is also the home of the Mos Eisley Cantina and Figrin D'an and the Modal Nodes.
Mos Eisley Cantina.
The Mos Eisley Cantina, officially named Chalmun's Cantina, is a bar located in Mos Eisley. It is the haunt of freighter pilots and other dangerous characters of varying races. In the holiday special, the Cantina is run by Ackmena (Bea Arthur).
It is featured in Lego Star Wars and , as the starting port.
Mos Espa.
Mos Espa is a city known for its distinct "desert-proof" domed buildings. It is home to a podracing track and was the home of Anakin and Shmi Skywalker in "". There was a large slave quarter within the rugged city.
Tosche Station (Toshi Station).
The Tosche Station, or Tosche Power Station, is a general store found in the city of Anchorhead. It sells a variety of goods. Tosche Station serves as the central location in the Anchorhead Story of "Star Wars", a series of scenes that were deleted from "Episode IV". It is described as a frequent hangout for Anchorhead's youth because its owner, Merle Tosche, is seldom around. In his absence, "Fixer" runs the business, accompanied by his girlfriend Camie, and assisted by a repair droid.
Tatooine's namesake.
The planet wasn't actually named in "Star Wars"; according to Lucas he intended to name it Utapau but finally he named it retrospectively after a Tunisian town near the movie's desert outdoor set, Tataouine (French spelling) or "Tatween" spelling in Tunisian Arabic. The name Utapau, however, was given to a different planet in "". Location filming was not done in the Tunisian town of Tataouine itself, but instead at Tunisian locations such as the Hotel Sidi Driss in Matmâta, Djerba, and Tozeur.

</doc>
<doc id="77865" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77865" title="Battleship Potemkin">
Battleship Potemkin

" Battleship Potemkin" was named the greatest film of all time at the Brussels World's Fair in 1958.
Plot.
The film is set in June 1905; the protagonists of the film are the members of the crew of the "Potemkin", a battleship of the Imperial Russian Navy's Black Sea Fleet. Eisenstein divided the plot into five acts, each with its own title:
Act I: Men and Maggots.
The scene begins with two sailors, Matyushenko and Vakulinchuk, discussing the need for the crew of the "Potemkin" to support the revolution taking place within Russia. While the "Potemkin" is anchored off the island of Tendra, off-duty sailors are sleeping in their bunks. As an officer inspects the quarters, he stumbles and takes out his aggression on a sleeping sailor. The ruckus causes Vakulinchuk to awake, and he gives a speech to the men as they come to. Vakulinchuk says, "Comrades! The time has come when we too must speak out. Why wait? All of Russia has risen! Are we to be the last?" The scene cuts to morning above deck, where sailors are remarking on the poor quality of the meat for the crew. The meat appears to be rotten and covered in worms, and the sailors say that "even a dog wouldn't eat this!" The ship's doctor, Smirnov, is called over to inspect the meat by the captain. Rather than worms, the doctor says that the insects are maggots, and they can be washed off prior to cooking. The sailors further complain about the poor quality of the rations, but the doctor declares the meat edible and ends the discussion. Senior officer Giliarovsky forces the sailors still looking over the rotten meat to leave the area, and the cook begins to prepare borscht although he too questions the quality of the meat. The crew refuses to eat the borscht, instead choosing bread and water, and canned goods. While cleaning dishes, one of the sailors sees an inscription on a plate, which reads "give us this day our daily bread." After considering the meaning of this phrase, the sailor smashes the plate and the scene ends.
Act II: Drama on the Deck.
All those who refuse the meat are judged guilty of insubordination and are brought to the fore-deck where they receive religious last rites. The sailors are obliged to kneel and a canvas cover is thrown over them as a firing squad marches onto the deck. The First Officer gives the order to fire, but the sailors in the firing squad lower their rifles and the uprising begins. The sailors overwhelm the outnumbered officers and take control of the ship. The officers are killed, the ship's priest is dragged out of hiding and the doctor is thrown into the ocean.
Act III: A Dead Man Calls for Justice.
The mutiny is successful but Vakulinchuk, the charismatic leader of the rebels, is killed. The "Potemkin" arrives at the port of Odessa. Vakulinchuk's body is taken ashore and displayed publicly by his companions in a tent with a sign on his chest that says "For a spoonful of soup" (Изъ-за ложки борща). The sailors gather to make a final farewell and praise Vakulinchuk as a hero. The people of Odessa welcome the sailors, but they attract the police.
Act IV: The Odessa Steps.
The best known sequence of the film is set on the Odessa steps, connecting the waterfront with the central city. A detachment of dismounted Cossacks forms a line at the top of the steps and march towards a crowd of unarmed civilians including women and children. The soldiers halt to fire a volley into the crowd and then continue their impersonal, machine-like advance. Brief sequences show individuals amongst the people fleeing or falling, a baby's pram running down the steps, a woman shot in the face, broken spectacles and the high boots of the soldiers moving in unison.
In retaliation, the sailors of the "Potemkin" decide to fire on a military headquarters with the guns of the battleship. Meanwhile, there is news that a squadron of loyal warships is coming to quell the revolt of "Potemkin".
Act V: One against all.
The sailors of the "Potemkin" decide to go all the way and lead the battleship from the port of Odessa to face the fleet of the Tsar. Just when the battle seems inevitable, the sailors of the formerly loyal ships incredibly refuse to open fire on their comrades, externalizing with songs and shouts of joy their solidarity with the mutineers and allowing them to pass unmolested through the fleet, waving the red flag.
Film style and content.
The film is composed of five episodes:
Eisenstein wrote the film as a revolutionary propaganda film, but also used it to test his theories of montage. The revolutionary Soviet filmmakers of the Kuleshov school of filmmaking were experimenting with the effect of film editing on audiences, and Eisenstein attempted to edit the film in such a way as to produce the greatest emotional response, so that the viewer would feel sympathy for the rebellious sailors of the Battleship "Potemkin" and hatred for their overlords. In the manner of most propaganda, the characterization is simple, so that the audience could clearly see with whom they should sympathize.
Eisenstein's experiment was a mixed success; he "was disappointed when "Potemkin" failed to attract masses of viewers", but the film was also released in a number of international venues, where audiences responded positively. In both the Soviet Union and overseas, the film shocked audiences, but not so much for its political statements as for its use of violence, which was considered graphic by the standards of the time. The film's potential to influence political thought through emotional response was noted by Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels, who called "Potemkin" "a marvelous film without equal in the cinema ... anyone who had no firm political conviction could become a Bolshevik after seeing the film". The film was not banned in Nazi Germany, although Himmler issued a directive prohibiting SS members from attending screenings, as he deemed the movie inappropriate for the troops. The film was eventually banned in some countries, including being banned at various times in both the United States and France, as well as in its native Soviet Union. The film was banned in the United Kingdom longer than any other film in British history.
The Odessa Steps sequence.
One of the most celebrated scenes in the film is the massacre of civilians on the Odessa Steps (also known as the Primorsky or Potemkin Stairs). This scene has been described as one of the most influential in the history of cinema, because it introduced concepts of film editing and montage to cinema. In this scene, the Tsar's soldiers in their white summer tunics march down a seemingly endless flight of steps in a rhythmic, machine-like fashion, firing volleys into a crowd. A separate detachment of mounted Cossacks charges the crowd at the bottom of the stairs. The victims include an older woman wearing pince-nez, a young boy with his mother, a student in uniform and a teenage schoolgirl. A mother pushing an infant in a baby carriage falls to the ground dying and the carriage rolls down the steps amidst the fleeing crowd.
The massacre on the steps, which never took place, was presumably inserted by Eisenstein for dramatic effect and to demonise the Imperial government. It is, however, based on the fact that there were widespread demonstrations in the area, sparked off by the arrival of the "Potemkin" in Odessa Harbour, and both "The Times" and the resident British Consul reported that troops fired on the crowds; deaths were allegedly in the hundreds. Roger Ebert writes, "That there was, in fact, no czarist massacre on the Odessa Steps scarcely diminishes the power of the scene ... It is ironic that did it so well that today, the bloodshed on the Odessa steps is often referred to as if it really happened."
Treatment in other works of art.
The scene is perhaps the best example of Eisenstein's theory on montage, and many films pay homage to the scene, including Terry Gilliam's "Brazil", Francis Ford Coppola's "The Godfather", Brian De Palma's "The Untouchables", George Lucas' ', Tibor Takacs' "Deathline", Laurel and Hardy's "The Music Box", Chandrashekhar Narvekar's Hindi film "Tezaab", Shukō Murase's anime "Ergo Proxy", and "The Magic Christian". Several films spoof it, including Woody Allen's "Bananas" and "Love and Death", Zucker, Abrahams, and Zucker's ' (though actually a parody of "The Untouchables"), Soviet-Polish comedy "Deja Vu", Jacob Tierney's "The Trotsky" and the Italian comedy "Il secondo tragico Fantozzi". The 2011 November 7 Parade in Moscow also features a homage to the film.
The painter Francis Bacon (1909–1992) was profoundly influenced by Eisenstein's images, particularly the Odessa Steps shot of the nurse's broken glasses and open mouthed scream. The open mouth image appeared first in his "Abstraction from the Human Form", in "Fragment of a Crucifixion", and other works including his famous "Head" series.
The Russian-born photographer and artist Alexey Titarenko paid tribute to the Odessa Steps shot in his series "City Of Shadows" (1991–1993) by using a crowd of desperate people on the stairs near the subway station in Saint Petersburg to demonize the Soviet government and as a symbol of human tragedy.
Distribution, censorship and restoration.
After its premiere in the Soviet Union, "Potemkin" was screened in the United States. It was shown in an edited form in Germany, with some scenes of extreme violence edited out by German distributors. A written introduction by Trotsky was cut from Soviet prints after he ran afoul of Stalin. The film was banned in West Germany, the United Kingdom (until 1954 and X-rated until 1978), France, and other countries for its revolutionary zeal.
Today the film is widely available in various DVD editions. In 2004, a three-year restoration of the film was completed. Many excised scenes of violence were restored, as well as the original written introduction by Trotsky. The previous titles, which had toned down the mutinous sailors' revolutionary rhetoric, were corrected so that they would now be an accurate translation of the original Russian titles.
Soundtracks.
To retain its relevance as a propaganda film for each new generation, Eisenstein hoped the score would be rewritten every 20 years. The original score was composed by Edmund Meisel. A salon orchestra performed the Berlin premiere in 1926. The instruments were flute/piccolo, trumpet, trombone, harmonium, percussion and strings without viola. Meisel wrote the score in twelve days because of the late approval of film censors. As time was so short Meisel repeated sections of the score. Composer/conductor Mark-Andreas Schlingensiepen has reorchestrated the original piano score to fit the version of the film available today.
Nikolai Kryukov composed a new score in 1950 for the 25th anniversary. In 1985, Chris Jarrett composed a solo piano accompaniment for the movie. In 1986 Eric Allaman wrote an electronic score for a showing that took place at the 1986 Berlin International Film Festival. The music was commissioned by the organizers, who wanted to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the film's German premiere. The score was played only at this premiere and has not been released on CD or DVD. Contemporary reviews were largely positive apart from negative comment because the music was electronic. Allaman also wrote an opera about Battleship Potemkin, which is musically separate from the film score.
In its commercial format, on DVD for example, the film is usually accompanied by classical music added for the 50th anniversary edition re-released in 1975. Three symphonies from Dmitri Shostakovich have been used, with No. 5 beginning and ending the film, being the most prominent. In 2007, Del Rey & The Sun Kings also recorded this soundtrack. In an attempt to make the film relevant to the 21st century, Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe (of the Pet Shop Boys) composed a soundtrack in 2004 with the Dresden Symphonic Orchestra. Their soundtrack, released in 2005 as "Battleship Potemkin", premiered in September 2004 at an open-air concert in Trafalgar Square, London. There were four further live performances of the work with the Dresdner Sinfoniker in Germany in September 2005 and one at the Swan Hunter ship yard in Newcastle upon Tyne in 2006.
The avant-garde jazz ensemble Club Foot Orchestra has also re-scored the film, and performed live accompanying the film. For the 2005 restoration of the film, under the direction of Enno Patalas in collaboration with Anna Bohn, released on DVD and Blu-ray, the Deutsche Kinemathek - Museum fur Film und Fernsehen, commissioned a re-recording of the original Edmund Meisel score, performed by the Babelsberg Orchestra, conducted by Helmut Imig. In 2011 the most recent restoration was completed with an entirely new soundtrack by members of the Apskaft group. Contributing members were AER20-200, awaycaboose, Ditzky, Drn Drn, Foucault V, fydhws, Hox Vox, Lurholm, mexicanvader, Quendus, Res Band, -Soundso- and speculativism. The entire film was digitally restored to a sharper image by Gianluca Missero (who records under the name Hox Vox). The new version is available at the Internet Archive.
Critical reaction.
"Battleship Potemkin" has received universal acclaim from critics. On review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an overall 100% "Certified Fresh" approval rating based on 44 reviews, with a rating average of 9.1 out of 10. The site's consensus reads, "A technical masterpiece, "Battleship Potemkin" is Soviet cinema at its finest, and its montage editing techniques remain influential to this day." Since its release, "Battleship Potemkin" has often been cited as one of the finest propaganda films ever made and considered amongst the greatest films of all time. The film was named the greatest film of all time at the Brussels World's Fair in 1958. Similarly, in 1952, "Sight & Sound" magazine cited "The Battleship Potemkin" as the fourth greatest film of all time and has been voted within the top ten in the magazine's five subsequent decennial polls, dropping to number 11 in the 2012 poll.
In 2007, a two-disc, restored version of the film was released on DVD. "Time" magazine's Richard Corliss named it one of the Top 10 DVDs of the year, ranking it at #5. It ranked #3 in "Empire"s "The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema" in 2010. In April 2011, "Battleship Potemkin" was re-released in UK cinemas, distributed by the British Film Institute. On its re-release, "Total Film" magazine gave the film a five-star review, stating: "...nearly 90 years on, Eisenstein’s masterpiece is still guaranteed to get the pulse racing."
Directors Orson Welles, Michael Mann and Paul Greengrass placed "Battleship Potemkin" on their list of favorite films.
Director Billy Wilder has named "Battleship Potemkin" as his favourite film of all time.

</doc>
<doc id="77866" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77866" title="Louis IV">
Louis IV

Louis IV or Ludwig IV may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="77868" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77868" title="Jefferson County, Alabama">
Jefferson County, Alabama

Jefferson County is the most populous county in the state of Alabama, in the United States. As of the 2010 census, the population was 658,466, making it the most populous county in Alabama. Its county seat is Birmingham, the most populous city in the state.
Jefferson County is included in the Birmingham-Hoover, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area.
History.
Jefferson County was established on December 13, 1819, by the Alabama Legislature. It was named in honor of Thomas Jefferson. The county is located in the north-central portion of the state, on the southmost edge of the Appalachian Mountains, in the center of the (former) iron, coal, and limestone mining belt of the Southern United States. Jefferson County is bordered by Blount County, Bibb County, St. Clair County, Shelby County, Tuscaloosa County, and Walker County, in Alabama. Jefferson County has a land area of about . Well before Birmingham was even founded in 1871, the county seat of Jefferson County was located at Carrollsville (1819 – 21) and Elyton (1821 – 73), and since 1873 it has been located in Birmingham, which was named for the English city of the same name in Warwickshire. That city had long been a center of iron and steel production in Great Britain. Note that Elyton has long been a part of Birmingham itself, since Birmingham was established by the merger of three towns, and the city has a long history of annexing its neighboring towns and villages, including North Birmingham.
Sewer construction and bond swap controversy.
Two extremely controversial undertakings by county officials in the 2000s left the county in extreme debt, eventually leading to a 2011 bankruptcy. In the 1990s, the county authorized and financed a massive overhaul of the county-owned sewer system, beginning in 1996. Sewerage and water rates had increased more than 300% in the 15 years before 2011, causing severe problems for the poor in Birmingham and the county.
Costs for the project increased due to problems in the financial area and to a series of risky bond-swap agreements made by county officials, encouraged by bribes by financial services companies. Both the project and its financing were scrutinized by federal prosecutors. By 2011, "six of Jefferson County's former commissioners had been found guilty of corruption for accepting the bribes, along with 15 other officials."
A series of controversial interest rate swaps, initiated in 2002 and 2003 by former Commission President Larry Langford (removed as the mayor of Birmingham after his conviction), were intended to lower interest payments. But they had the opposite effect, increasing the county's indebtedness to the point that it had to declare bankruptcy. The bond swaps were the focus of an investigation by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
In late February 2008 Standard & Poor's lowered the rating of Jefferson County bonds to "junk" status. The likelihood of the county filing for Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection was debated in the press. In early March 2008, Moody's followed suit and indicated that it would also review the county's ability to meet other bond obligations.
On March 7, 2008, Jefferson County failed to post $184 million collateral as required under its sewer bond agreements, thereby moving into technical default.
In February 2011, Lesley Curwen of the BBC World Service interviewed David Carrington, the newly appointed president of the County Commission, about the risk of defaulting on bonds issued to finance “what could be the most expensive sewage system in history.” Carrington said there was “no doubt that people from Wall Street offered bribes” and “have to take a huge responsibility for what happened.” Wall Street investment banks, including JP Morgan and others arranged complex financial deals using swaps. The fees and penalty charges increased the cost so the county in 2011 had $3.2 billion outstanding. Carrington said one of the problems was that elected officials had welcomed scheduling with very low early payments so long as peak payments occurred after they left office.
The SEC awarded the county $75 million in compensation relation to “unlawful payments” against JP Morgan; in addition the company was penalized by having to forfeit $647 million of future fees.
2011 Bankruptcy filing.
Jefferson County filed for bankruptcy on November 9, 2011. This action was valued at $4.2 billion, with debts of $3.14 billion relating to sewer work; it was then the most expensive municipal bankruptcy ever in the U.S. In 2013 it was surpassed by the Detroit bankruptcy. The County requested Chapter 9 relief under federal statute 11 U.S.C. §921. The case was filed in the Northern District of Alabama Bankruptcy Court as case number 11-05736.
, Jefferson County had slashed expenses and reduced employment of county government workers by more than 700.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.1%) is water. It is the fifth-largest county in Alabama by land area. The county is home to the Watercress Darter National Wildlife Refuge.
Demographics.
2010.
Whereas according to the 2010 United States Census Bureau:
2000.
As of the census of 2000, there were 662,047 people, 263,265 households, and 175,861 families residing in the county. The population density was 595 people per square mile (230/km2). There were 288,162 housing units at an average density of 259 per square mile (100/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 58.10% White, 39.36% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.90% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.59% from other races, and 0.80% from two or more races. About 1.55% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. The largest self-reported European ancestries in Jefferson County, Alabama are English 9.7%(64,016), "American" 9.6%(63,015), Irish 8.6%(56,695), German 7.2%(47,690). Those citing "American" ancestry in Alabama are of overwhelmingly English extraction, however most English Americans identify simply as having American ancestry because their roots have been in North America for so long, in many cases since the 17th century. Demographers estimate that roughly 20–23% of people in Alabama are of predominantly English and related British Isles ancestry. There are also many more people in Alabama of Scots-Irish origins than are self-reported.
There were 263,265 households, out of which 30.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.10% were married couples living together, 17.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.20% were non-families. Nearly 28.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45, and the average family size was 3.04.
In the county, the population was spread out with 24.80% under the age of 18, 9.60% from 18 to 24, 29.70% from 25 to 44, 22.30% from 45 to 64, and 13.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.50 males.
In 2007 Jefferson County had the highest rate of syphilis cases per 100,000 in the US, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The median income for a household in the county was $36,868, and the median income for a family was $45,951. Males had a median income of $35,954 versus $26,631 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,892. About 11.60% of families and 14.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.20% of those under age 18 and 12.70% of those age 65 or over.
Government and infrastructure.
Jefferson County is one of the eight counties in Alabama with a limited-form of home rule government. A 1973 Commission had recommended that all counties be granted home rule under the state constitution, but the state legislature refused to give up its control over local affairs.
Changes to county representation in the state legislature followed the state's incorporating the principle of one man, one vote from the US Supreme Court decision of "Baker v. Carr" (1964), which ruled that bicameral legislatures had to have both houses based on population districts, rather than geographic ones. The complexity of Birmingham and Jefferson County urban conditions required more local direction and the county gained some home rule functions by 1944. It allows the county to be able to set up a zoning system for land use, maintain the sanitary sewer, sewerage systems and highways, provide for garbage and trash disposal, and to enforce taxation (except for property taxes).
The county is governed by a five-member commission that combines the legislative and executive duties for the county. The Commissioners are elected from single-member districts, rather than by an "at-large" election. Each county commissioner represents one of the five districts in the county. By votes in the commission, the commissioners are given executive responsibilities for the various county departments, which fall under the categories of "Roads and Transportation", "Community Development", "Environmental Services", "Health and Human Services", "Technology and Land Development", and "Finance and General Services". The County Commission elects its own President, who is the chairman of all County Commission meetings, and who has additional executive duties.
Taxation.
Sales tax on many items within the county can be as high as 12%. The County Commission approved an educational sales tax by a 3–2 vote in October 2004. This was implemented In January 2005, as a 1% sales tax to support funding for construction of needed education facilities. This additional 1% has resulted in some county municipalities, such as Fairfield, to have sales tax rates as high as 10%, while other municipalities and incorporated communities had an increase in their total sales tax rate from 8% to 9%. The state of Alabama sales tax was 4% at the time and Jefferson County's was 2% in total. Municipal sales taxes go as high as 4%.
On March 16, 2011, the Alabama Supreme Court ruled that Jefferson County's 2009 occupational tax law was passed unconstitutionally. This decision dealt a devastating financial blow to a county considering bankruptcy.
The Commission hires a county manager, who oversees and directs daily operations of county departments.
Law.
Jefferson County is served by the Jefferson County Sheriff's Department. The County Sheriff is chosen by the eligible voters in an "at large" election. The Sheriff's Department fields about 175 deputy sheriffs who patrol the unincorporated areas of the county, and also all municipalities that do not have their own police departments. The Sheriff's Department has two county jails, one in Birmingham and one in Bessemer, which are used to detain suspects awaiting trial (who cannot afford to post bail) and convicted criminals serving sentences less than one year in length.
Two judicial courthouses are located in Jefferson County, a situation dating to when the state legislature was preparing to split off a portion of Jefferson County to create a new county, centered around Bessemer. The split did not take place because the proposed new county could not have sufficient area: a minimum of 500 square miles, to meet the requirement of the Alabama State Constitution. The additional county courthouse and some parallel functions remain in service. The main courthouse is in Birmingham and the second one is located in Bessemer. Certain elected county officials maintain offices in the Bessemer annex, such as the Assistant Tax Collector, the Assistant Tax Assessor, and the Assistant District Attorney.
Prisons.
The Alabama Department of Corrections operates the William E. Donaldson Correctional Facility, a prison for men, in unincorporated Jefferson County near Bessemer. The prison includes one of the two Alabama death rows for men.
Education.
Except for cities such as Birmingham that have established their own local school districts, all parts of Jefferson County are served by Jefferson County Board of Education. Parts within Birmingham are served by Birmingham City Schools. Other cities in the county that have established their own school systems are Gardendale, Bessemer, Fairfield, Midfield, Trussville, Homewood, Leeds, Hoover, Vestavia Hills, Tarrant, and Mountain Brook.
Politics.
Although the majority-white state of Alabama voted for John McCain by double digits in 2008, Democrat Barack Obama carried Jefferson County with 166,121 votes (52%). John McCain received 149,921 votes (47%). Obama also carried the county in 2012.
Transportation.
Railroads.
AMTRAK passenger service is provided by the Crescent, which stops in Birmingham. Freight service is provided by BNSF Railway, CSX Transportation, Norfolk Southern Railway, Alabama & Tennessee River Railway, and Birmingham Terminal Railway (formerly Birmingham Southern Railroad). There is also one switching and terminal railroad, Alabama Warrior Railway.
Air travel.
Birmingham is the location of the Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport, which provides service, either direct or connecting, to most of the rest of the United States.
References.
Specific references:
General references:

</doc>
<doc id="77870" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77870" title="Lamar County, Alabama">
Lamar County, Alabama

Lamar County (formerly Jones County and Sanford County) is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, the population was 14,564. Its county seat is Vernon and is a prohibition or dry county. Its name is in honor of Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar, member of the United States Senate from Mississippi.
History.
Jones County, Alabama was established on February 4, 1867, with land taken from the southern part of Marion County and the western part of Fayette County, and it was named for E. P. Jones of Fayette County, with its county seat at Vernon. This county was abolished on November 13, 1867. On October 8, 1868, the area was again organized into a county, but as Covington County had been renamed "Jones County" the same year (a change that lasted only a few months), the new county was named Sanford, in honor of H. C. Sanford of Cherokee County. On February 8, 1877, the county was renamed Lamar in honor of Senator L.Q.C. Lamar of Mississippi.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.1%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 15,904 people, 6,468 households, and 4,715 families residing in the county. The population density was 26 people per square mile (10/km2). There were 7,517 housing units at an average density of 12 per square mile (5/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 86.87% White, 11.98% Black or African American, 0.11% Native American, 0.06% Asian, 0.46% from other races, and 0.51% from two or more races. 1.30% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,468 households out of which 31.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.60% were married couples living together, 10.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.10% were non-families. 25.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.89.
In the county the population was spread out with 23.60% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 27.70% from 25 to 44, 24.10% from 45 to 64, and 15.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 93.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.90 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $28,059, and the median income for a family was $33,050. Males had a median income of $30,453 versus $18,947 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,435. About 13.30% of families and 16.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.10% of those under age 18 and 18.60% of those age 65 or over.
2010 census.
As of the census of 2010, there were 14,564 people, 6,103 households, and 4,207 families residing in the county. The population density was 24 people per square mile (9/km2). There were 7,354 housing units at an average density of 12 per square mile (5/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 86.7% White, 11.3% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.0% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 1.3% from two or more races. 1.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,103 households out of which 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.2% were married couples living together, 11.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.1% were non-families. 28.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.8.
In the county the population was spread out with 22.2% under the age of 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 22.5% from 25 to 44, 29.3% from 45 to 64, and 18.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43.5 years. For every 100 females there were 95.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.4 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $33,887, and the median income for a family was $42,492. Males had a median income of $36,833 versus $25,125 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,789. About 13.2% of families and 18.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.2% of those under age 18 and 14.6% of those age 65 or over.

</doc>
<doc id="77871" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77871" title="Carinus">
Carinus

Carinus (; died 285) was Roman Emperor from 282 to 285. The elder son of emperor Carus, he was first appointed "Caesar" and in the beginning of 283 co-emperor of the western portion of the empire by his father. Official accounts of his character and career have been filtered through the propaganda of his successful opponent, Diocletian.
Reign.
He fought with success against the Germanic Quadi tribes, but soon left the defence of the Upper Rhine to his legates and returned to Rome, where the surviving accounts, which demonize him, assert that he abandoned himself to all kinds of debauchery and excess. More certainly, he celebrated the annual "ludi Romani" on a scale of unexampled magnificence.
After the death of Carus, the army in the east demanded to return to Europe, and Numerian, the younger son of Carus, was forced to comply. During a halt at Chalcedon, Numerian was found dead. Diocletian, commander of the body-guards, claimed that Numerian had been assassinated, and he was proclaimed emperor by the soldiers.
Carinus left Rome at once and set out for the east to meet Diocletian. On his way through Pannonia he put down the usurper Sabinus Iulianus and in July 285 he encountered the army of Diocletian at the Margus River in Moesia.
Death in 285.
Historians differ on what then ensued. At the Battle of the Margus River (Morava), according to one account, the valour of his troops had gained the day, but Carinus was assassinated by a tribune whose wife he had seduced. Another account represents the battle as resulting in a complete victory for Diocletian, and Carinus' army deserted him. This account may be confirmed by the fact that Diocletian kept in service Carinus' Praetorian Guard commander, Titus Claudius Aurelius Aristobulus.
Character.
Carinus has a reputation as one of the worst Roman emperors. This infamy may have been supported by Diocletian himself. For example, the (unreliable) "Historia Augusta" has Carinus marrying nine wives, while neglecting to mention his only real wife, Magnia Urbica, by whom he had a son, Marcus Aurelius Nigrinianus.
After his death, Carinus' memory was officially condemned in the Roman proceeding known as Damnatio Memoriae. His name, along with that of his wife, was erased from inscriptions.

</doc>
<doc id="77872" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77872" title="Henry County, Alabama">
Henry County, Alabama

Henry County is a county of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census, its population was 17,302. Its county seat is Abbeville. Its name is in honor of Patrick Henry (1736–1799), famous orator and Governor of Virginia.
Henry County is part of the Dothan, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area.
History.
Between 1763 and 1783 the area that is now Henry County, Alabama was under the jurisdiction of the colony of British West Florida. Henry County was established on December 13, 1819 by the Alabama Territorial Legislature. The area was ceded by the Creek Indian Nation in 1814 under the Treaty of Fort Jackson. Henry County was formed before the State of Alabama was organized. The area that includes Henry County had historically been part of the Lower Creek Confederacy. It was occupied for thousands of years before that by varying cultures of indigenous peoples. Abbeville was designated as the county seat in 1833.
Upon formation, Henry County was the largest county within Alabama, composing all or portions of the present counties of Barbour, Coffee, Covington, Crenshaw, Dale, Geneva, Houston, and Pike. When the youngest county of Houston was formed in 1903, Henry became the smallest.
After 1814, the colonial settlers' developed Franklin as the first white settlement in the Creek territory. The former river port served Abbeville on the Chattahoochee River. Much of the original Henry County was part of the original Alabama wiregrass region.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.2%) is water. It is the fourth-smallest county in Alabama by total area.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 16,310 people, 6,525 households, and 4,730 families residing in the county. The population density was 29 people per square mile (11/km2). There were 8,037 housing units at an average density of 14 per square mile (6/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 65.67% White, 32.30% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.06% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.00% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. Nearly 1.53% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,525 households out of which 30.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.90% were married couples living together, 14.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.50% were non-families. Nearly 25.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47, and the average family size was 2.95.
In the county, the population was spread out with 24.10% under the age of 18, 8.40% from 18 to 24, 25.70% from 25 to 44, 25.50% from 45 to 64, and 16.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.20 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $30,353, and the median income for a family was $36,555. Males had a median income of $29,189 versus $20,827 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,681. About 14.50% of families and 19.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.00% of those under age 18 and 20.60% of those age 65 or over.
2010 census.
As of the census of 2010, there were 17,302 people, 6,994 households, and 4,975 families residing in the county. The population density was 31 people per square mile (11.8/km2). There were 8,891 housing units at an average density of 15.6 per square mile (6/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 68.6% White, 28.6% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 1.0% from two or more races. Nearly 2.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 6,994 households out of which 25.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.9% were married couples living together, 14.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.9% were non-families. Nearly 25.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45, and the average family size was 2.92.
In the county, the population was spread out with 22.6% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 23.1% from 25 to 44, 29.7% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $38,379, and the median income for a family was $46,976. Males had a median income of $37,276 versus $26,771 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,716. About 15.0% of families and 15.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.7% of those under age 18 and 15.4% of those age 65 or over.

</doc>
<doc id="77873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77873" title="Houston County, Alabama">
Houston County, Alabama

Houston County is a county located in the southeastern corner of the U.S. state of Alabama. As of the 2010 census the population was 101,547. Its county seat is Dothan.
Houston County is part of the Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area.
History.
Houston County was established on February 9, 1903, from parts of Dale County, Geneva County and Henry County. It was named after George Smith Houston, the 24th Governor of Alabama.
Geography.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 88,787 people, 35,834 households, and 25,119 families residing in the county. The population density was 153 people per square mile (59/km2). There were 39,571 housing units at an average density of 68 per square mile (26/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 73.08% White, 24.60% Black or African American, 0.37% Native American, 0.62% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.39% from other races, and 0.92% from two or more races. 1.26% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 35,834 households out of which 33.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.50% were married couples living together, 14.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.90% were non-families. 26.40% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.95.
In the county the population was spread out with 25.90% under the age of 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 28.70% from 25 to 44, 23.50% from 45 to 64, and 13.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 95.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.20 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $34,431, and the median income for a family was $42,437. Males had a median income of $32,092 versus $21,409 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,759. About 11.80% of families and 15.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.10% of those under age 18 and 16.30% of those age 65 or over.
2010 census.
As of the census of 2010, there were 101,547 people, 40,969 households, and 28,041 families residing in the county. The population density was 175 people per square mile (67.5/km2). There were 45,319 housing units at an average density of 77.9 per square mile (30.1/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 70.0% White, 25.8% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. 2.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 40,969 households out of which 29.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.9% were married couples living together, 16.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.6% were non-families. 27.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.96.
In the county the population was spread out with 24.5% under the age of 18, 8.3% from 18 to 24, 25.7% from 25 to 44, 27.0% from 45 to 64, and 14.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.5 years. For every 100 females there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.5 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $41,022, and the median income for a family was $51,741. Males had a median income of $41,021 versus $28,240 for females. The per capita income for the county was $22,725. About 12.7% of families and 16.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.8% of those under age 18 and 11.5% of those age 65 or over.
Government.
As of 2016, the County Chairman is held by Mark Culver, while William Dempsey is the Chief Administrative Officer. The County Commission is District 1, Curtis Harvey; District 2, Doug Sinquefield; District 3, Jackie Battles; and District 4, Brandon Shoupe. Donald Valenza serves as Sheriff, Probate Judge is Patrick Davenport, Revenue Commissioner is Starla Moss, Coroner is Robert Byrd. The county engineer is Barkley Kirkland. Houston County is located in Alabama's Second Congressional District; its current Representative (as of 2016) is Martha Roby (R).

</doc>
<doc id="77875" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77875" title="Government of Kazakhstan">
Government of Kazakhstan

The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan () oversees a presidential republic. The President of Kazakhstan, currently Nursultan Nazarbayev, is head of state and nominates the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament.
In July 2015 Kazakhstan was ranked 50th in the Government Efficiency Index compiled by World Economic Forum. The efficiency index considers expenditures, workload regulations and political transparency. Kazakhstan beats of a number of European countries in government efficiency, according to the list. In particular, Kazakhstan is ahead of Belgium and France.
Executive branch.
President.
The president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term
. The prime minister and first deputy prime minister are appointed by the president. Council of Ministers is also appointed by the president. President Nazarbayev expanded his presidential powers by decree: only he can initiate constitutional amendments, appoint and dismiss the government, dissolve Parliament, call referendums at his discretion, and appoint administrative heads of regions and cities.
The president is the head of state. He also is the commander in chief of the armed forces and may veto legislation that has been passed by the Parliament. President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who has been in office since Kazakhstan became independent. The prime minister, who serves at the pleasure of the president, chairs the Council of Ministers and serves as Kazakhstan's head of government. There are three deputy prime ministers and 17 ministers in the Council. Daniyal K. Akhmetov became the Prime Minister in June 2003. He was succeeded by Karim Massimov who assumed office in January 2007.
In the 2005 Presidential elections Nursultan Nazarbayev was re-elected for a seven-year term. 5 candidates participated in the elections. 91.15% of voters supported Nazarbayev. The participation in the election made up 77%. A presidential election was held on April 26, 2015.
Agencies and committees.
Kazakhstan's National Security Committee (NSC) was established on 13 June 1992. It includes the Service of Internal Security, Military Counterintelligence, Border Guard, several Commandos units, and Foreign Intelligence (Barlau). The latter is considered by many as the most important part of NSC. Its director is Major General Adil Shayahmetov.
Legislative branch.
The legislature, known as the Parliament (Parliament), has two chambers. The Assembly ("Mazhilis") has 77 seats, elected for a four-year term, 67 in single seat constituencies and 10 by proportional representation. The Senate has 47 members, 40 of whom are elected for six-year terms in double-seat constituencies by the local assemblies, half renewed every two years, and 7 presidential appointees. In addition, ex-presidents are ex-officio senators for life.
Majilis deputies and the government both have the right of legislative initiative, though most legislation considered by the Parliament is proposed by the government.
Judicial branch.
There are 44 judges on the Supreme Court of the Republic of Kazakhstan. There are seven members of the Constitutional Council.
Administrative divisions.
Kazakhstan is divided into 14 Provinces and the two municipal districts of Almaty and Astana. Each is headed by an Akim (provincial governor) appointed by the president. Municipal Akims are appointed by Province Akims. The Government of Kazakhstan transferred its capital from Almaty to Astana on 10 June 1998.
The Province or "oblystar" (singular — "oblys") and cities ("kalalar", singular — "kala")* are : Almaty (Taldykorgan), Almaty*, Akmola (Kokshetau), Astana*, Aktobe (Aktobe), Atyrau (Atyrau), West Kazakhstan (Oral), Baykonur*, Mangystau (Aktau), South Kazakhstan (Shymkent), Pavlodar (Pavlodar), Karagandy (Karaganda), Kostanay (Kostanay), Kyzylorda (Kyzylorda), East Kazakhstan (Oskemen), North Kazakhstan (Petropavl), Zhambyl (Taraz). The administrative divisions have the same names as their administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center name following in parentheses); in 1995 the Governments of Kazakhstan and Russia entered into an agreement whereby Russia would lease for a period of 20 years an area of enclosing the Baikonur space launch facilities and the city of Baikonur.

</doc>
