<doc id="51346" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51346" title="Coconut">
Coconut

The coconut tree ("Cocos nucifera") is a member of the family Arecaceae (palm family).
It is the only accepted species in the genus "Cocos". The term coconut can refer to the entire coconut palm, the seed, or the fruit, which, botanically, is a drupe, not a nut. The spelling cocoanut is an archaic form of the word. The term is derived from the 16th-century Portuguese and Spanish word "coco" meaning "head" or "skull", from the three indentations on the coconut shell that resemble facial features.
The coconut is known for its great versatility as seen in the many uses of its different parts and found throughout the tropics and subtropics. Coconuts are part of the daily diets of many people. Coconuts are different from any other fruits because they contain a large quantity of "water" and when immature they are known as tender-nuts or jelly-nuts and may be harvested for drinking. When mature, they still contain some water and can be used as seednuts or processed to give oil from the kernel, charcoal from the hard shell and coir from the fibrous husk. The endosperm is initially in its nuclear phase suspended within the coconut water. As development continues, cellular layers of endosperm deposit along the walls of the coconut, becoming the edible coconut "flesh". When dried, the coconut flesh is called copra. The oil and milk derived from it are commonly used in cooking and frying; coconut oil is also widely used in soaps and cosmetics. The clear liquid coconut water within is potable. The husks and leaves can be used as material to make a variety of products for furnishing and decorating. The coconut also has cultural and religious significance in many societies that use it.
Description.
Plant.
"Cocos nucifera" is a large palm, growing up to tall, with pinnate leaves long, and pinnae 60–90 cm long; old leaves break away cleanly, leaving the trunk smooth. Coconuts are generally classified into two general types: tall and dwarf. On fertile soil, a tall coconut palm tree can yield up to 75 fruits per year, but more often yields less than 30, mainly due to poor cultural practices. Given proper care and growing conditions, coconut palms produce their first fruit in six to ten years, taking 15 – 20 years to reach peak production.
Fruit.
Botanically, the coconut fruit is a drupe, not a true nut. Like other fruits, it has three layers: the exocarp, mesocarp, and endocarp. The exocarp and mesocarp make up the "husk" of the coconut. Coconuts sold in the shops of nontropical countries often have had the exocarp (outermost layer) removed. The mesocarp is composed of a fiber, called coir, which has many traditional and commercial uses. The shell has three germination pores (micropyles) or "eyes" that are clearly visible on its outside surface once the husk is removed.
A full-sized coconut weighs about . It takes around 6,000 full-grown coconuts to produce a tonne of copra.
Roots.
Unlike some other plants, the palm tree has neither a tap root nor root hairs, but has a fibrous root system.
The coconut palm root system consists of an abundance of thin roots that grow outward from the plant near the surface. Only a few of the roots penetrate deep into the soil for stability. The type of root system is known as fibrous or adventitious, and is a characteristic of grass species. Other types of large trees produce a single downward-growing tap root with a number of feeder roots growing from it.
Coconut palms continue to produce roots from the base of the stem throughout its life. The number of roots produced depends on the age of the tree and the environment, with more than 3,600 roots possible on a tree that's 60 to 70 years old.
Roots are usually less than about 3 inches in diameter and uniformly thick from the tree trunk to the root tip.
Inflorescence.
The palm produces both the female and male flowers on the same inflorescence; thus, the palm is monoecious. Other sources use the term polygamomonoecious. The female flower is much larger than the male flower. Flowering occurs continuously. Coconut palms are believed to be largely cross-pollinated, although some dwarf varieties are self-pollinating.
Etymology.
One of the earliest mentions of the coconut dates back to the One Thousand and One Nights story of Sinbad the Sailor; he is known to have bought and sold coconuts during his fifth voyage. "Thenga", its Malayalam and Tamil name, was used in the detailed description of coconut found in "Itinerario" by Ludovico di Varthema published in 1510 and also in the later "Hortus Indicus Malabaricus". Even earlier, it was called "nux indica", a name used by Marco Polo in 1280 while in Sumatra, taken from the Arabs who called it جوز هندي "jawz hindī". Both names translate to "Indian nut". In the earliest description of the coconut palm known, given by Cosmos of Alexandria in his "Topographia Christiana" written about 545 AD, there is a reference to the argell tree and its drupe.
Historical evidence favors the European origin of the name "coconut", for no name is similar in any of the languages of India, where the Portuguese first found the fruit; and indeed Barbosa, Barros, and Garcia, in mentioning the Tamil/Malayalam name "tenga", and Canarese "narle", expressly say, "we call these fruits "quoquos"", "our people have given it the name of coco", and "that which we call coco, and the Malabars temga".
The OED states: "Portuguese and Spanish authors of the 16th c. agree in identifying the word with Portuguese and Spanish "coco" "grinning face, grin, grimace", also "bugbear, scarecrow", cognate with "cocar" "to grin, make a grimace"; the name being said to refer to the face-like appearance of the base of the shell, with its three holes. According to Losada, the name came from Portuguese explorers, the sailors of Vasco da Gama in India, who first brought them to Europe. The coconut shell reminded them of a ghost or witch in Portuguese folklore called "coco" (also "côca"). The first known recorded usage of the term is 1555.
The specific name "nucifera" is Latin for "nut-bearing".
Origin, domestication, and dispersal.
Origin.
The origin of the plant is the subject of debate.
O.F. Cook was one of the earliest modern researchers to draw conclusions about the location of origin of "Cocos nucifera" based on its current-day worldwide distribution. He hypothesized that the coconut originated in the Americas, based on his belief that American coconut populations predated European contact and because he considered pan-tropical distribution by ocean currents improbable. Thor Heyerdahl later used this hypothesis of the American origin of the coconut to support his theory that the Pacific Islanders originated in South America. However, more evidence exists for an Indo-Pacific origin either around Melanesia and Malesia or the Indian Ocean. The oldest fossils known of the modern coconut dating from the Eocene period from around 37 to 55 million years ago were found in Australia and India, but older palm fossils such as some of nipa fruit have been found in the Americas. A species with strawberry-sized nuts ("Cocos zeylanica") lived in New Zealand in the Miocene. Since 1978, the work on tracing the probable origin and dispersal of "Cocos nucifera" has only recently been augmented by a publication on the germination rate of the coconut seednut and another on the importance of the coral atoll ecosystem. Briefly, the coconut originated in the coral atoll ecosystem — without human intervention — and required a thick husk and slow germination to survive and disperse.
Domestication.
Coconuts could not reach inland locations without human intervention (to carry seednuts, plant seedlings, etc.) and it was early germination on the palm (vivipary) that was important, rather than increasing the number or size of the edible parts of a fruit that was already large enough. Human cultivation of the coconut selected, not for larger size, but for thinner husks and increased volume of endosperm, the solid “meat” or liquid “water” that provides the fruit its food value. Although these modifications for domestication would reduce the fruit’s ability to float, this ability would be irrelevant to a cultivated population.
Among modern "C. nucifera", two major types or variants: a thick-husked, angular fruit and a thin-husked, spherical fruit with a higher proportion of endosperm reflect a trend of cultivation in "C. nucifera": the first coconuts were of the "niu kafa" type, with thick husks to protect the seed, an angular, highly ridged shape to promote buoyancy during ocean dispersal, and a pointed base that allowed fruits to dig into the sand, preventing them from being washed away during germination on a new island. As early human communities began to harvest coconuts for eating and planting, they (perhaps unintentionally) selected for a larger endosperm to husk ratio and a broader, spherical base, which rendered the fruit useful as a cup or bowl, thus creating the "niu vai" type. The decreased buoyancy and increased fragility of this spherical, thin-husked fruit would not matter for a species that had started to be dispersed by humans and grown in plantations. Harries’ adoption of the Polynesian terms "niu kafa" and "niu vai" has now passed into general scientific discourse, and his hypothesis is generally accepted.
Variants of "C. nucifera" are also categorized as Tall (var. "typica") or Dwarf (var. "nana"). The two groups are genetically distinct, with the Dwarf variety showing a greater degree of artificial selection for ornamental traits and for early germination and fruiting. The Tall variety is outcrossing while Dwarf palms are incrossing, which has led to a much greater degree of genetic diversity within the Tall group. It is believed that the Dwarf subgroup mutated from the Tall group under human selection pressure.
Dispersal.
It is often stated that coconuts can travel 110 days, or , by sea and still be able to germinate. This figure has been questioned based on the extremely small sample size that forms the basis of the paper that makes this claim. Thor Heyerdahl provides an alternative, and much shorter, estimate based on his first-hand experience crossing the Pacific Ocean on the raft Kon-Tiki: "The nuts we had in baskets on deck remained edible and capable of germinating the whole way to Polynesia. But we had laid about half among the special provisions below deck, with the waves washing around them. Every single one of these was ruined by the sea water. And no coconut can float over the sea faster than a balsa raft moves with the wind behind it." He also notes that several of the nuts began to germinate by the time they had been ten weeks at sea, precluding an unassisted journey of 100 days or more. However, it is more than likely that the coconut variety Heyerdahl chose for his long sea voyage was of the large, fleshy, spherical "niu vai" type, which Harries observed to have a significantly shorter germination type and worse buoyancy than the uncultivated "niu kafa" type. Therefore, Heyerdahl’s observations cannot be considered conclusive when it comes to determining the independent dispersal ability of the uncultivated coconut.
Drift models based on wind and ocean currents have shown that coconuts could not have drifted across the Pacific unaided. This provides some circumstantial evidence that Austronesian peoples carried coconuts across the ocean and that they could not have dispersed worldwide without human agency. More recently, genomic analysis of cultivated coconut ("Cocos nucifera L.") has shed light on the movements of Austronesian peoples. By examining 10 microsatellite loci, researchers found two genetically distinct subpopulations of coconut—one originating in the Indian Ocean, the other in the Pacific Ocean. However, admixture, the transfer of genetic material, evidently occurred between the two populations. Given that coconuts are ideally suited for ocean dispersal, individuals from one population possibly could have floated to the other. However, the locations of the admixture events are limited to Madagascar and coastal east Africa, and exclude the Seychelles. This pattern coincides with the known trade routes of Austronesian sailors. Additionally, a genetically distinct subpopulation of coconut on the Pacific coast of Latin America has undergone a genetic bottleneck resulting from a founder effect; however, its ancestral population is the Pacific coconut. This, together with their use of the South American sweet potato, suggests that Austronesian peoples may have sailed as far east as the Americas.
Distribution.
The coconut has spread across much of the tropics, probably aided in many cases by seafaring people. Coconut fruit in the wild are light, buoyant and highly water resistant, and evolved to disperse significant distances via marine currents. Specimens have been collected from the sea as far north as Norway. In the Hawaiian Islands, the coconut is regarded as a Polynesian introduction, first brought to the islands by early Polynesian voyagers from their homelands in Oceania. They have been found in the Caribbean and the Atlantic coasts of Africa and South America for less than 500 years, but evidence of their presence on the Pacific coast of South America predates Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Americas. They are now almost ubiquitous between 26°N and 26°S except for the interiors of Africa and South America.
Natural habitat.
The coconut palm thrives on sandy soils and is highly tolerant of salinity. It prefers areas with abundant sunlight and regular rainfall (1500 mm to 2500 mm annually), which makes colonizing shorelines of the tropics relatively straightforward. Coconuts also need high humidity (70–80%+) for optimum growth, which is why they are rarely seen in areas with low humidity. However, they can be found in humid areas with low annual precipitation such as in Karachi, Pakistan, which receives only about of rainfall per year, but is consistently warm and humid.
Coconut palms require warm conditions for successful growth, and are intolerant of cold weather. Some seasonal variation is tolerated, with good growth where mean summer temperatures are between , and survival as long as winter temperatures are above ; they will survive brief drops to . Severe frost is usually fatal, although they have been known to recover from temperatures of . They may grow but not fruit properly in areas with insufficient warmth, such as Bermuda.
The conditions required for coconut trees to grow without any care are:
The main limiting factor for most locations which satisfy the rainfall and temperature requirements is canopy growth, except those locations near coastlines, where the sandy soil and salt spray limit the growth of most other trees.
Diseases.
Coconuts are susceptible to the phytoplasma disease lethal yellowing. One recently selected cultivar, the Maypan, has been bred for resistance to this disease.
Pests.
The coconut palm is damaged by the larvae of many Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species which feed on it, including "Batrachedra" spp.: "B. arenosella", "B. atriloqua" (feeds exclusively on "C. nucifera"), "B. mathesoni" (feeds exclusively on "C. nucifera"), and "B. nuciferae".
"Brontispa longissima" (coconut leaf beetle) feeds on young leaves, and damages both seedlings and mature coconut palms. In 2007, the Philippines imposed a quarantine in Metro Manila and 26 provinces to stop the spread of the pest and protect the $800 million Philippine coconut industry.
The fruit may also be damaged by eriophyid coconut mites ("Eriophyes guerreronis"). This mite infests coconut plantations, and is devastating: it can destroy up to 90% of coconut production. The immature seeds are infested and desapped by larvae staying in the portion covered by the perianth of the immature seed; the seeds then drop off or survive deformed. Spraying with wettable sulfur 0.4% or with neem-based pesticides can give some relief, but is cumbersome and labor-intensive.
In Kerala (India), the main coconut pests are the coconut mite, the rhinoceros beetle, the red palm weevil and the coconut leaf caterpillar. Research into countermeasures to these pests has yielded no results; researchers from the Kerala Agricultural University and the Central Plantation Crop Research Institute, Kasaragode continue to work on countermeasures. The Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Kannur under Kerala Agricultural University has developed an innovative extension approach called the compact area group approach (CAGA) to combat coconut mites.
Production and cultivation.
Coconut palms are grown in more than 90 countries of the world, with a total production of 62 million tonnes per year (table). Most of the world production is in tropical Asia, with Indonesia, the Philippines and India accounting collectively for 73% of the world total (table).
Cultivation.
Coconut trees are hard to establish in dry climates, and cannot grow there without frequent irrigation; in drought conditions, the new leaves do not open well, and older leaves may become desiccated; fruit also tends to be shed.
The extent of cultivation in the tropics is threatening a number of habitats, such as mangroves; an example of such damage to an ecoregion is in the Petenes mangroves of the Yucatán.
Harvesting.
In some parts of the world (Thailand and Malaysia), trained pig-tailed macaques are used to harvest coconuts. Thailand has been raising and training pig-tailed macaques to pick coconuts for around 400 years.
Training schools for pig-tailed macaques still exist both in southern Thailand and in the Malaysian state of Kelantan.
India.
Traditional areas of coconut cultivation in India are the states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, West Bengal and the islands of Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar. As per 2014-15 statistics from Coconut Development Board of Government of India, four southern states combined account for almost 90% of the total production in the country: Tamil Nadu (33.84%), Karnataka (25.15%), Kerala (23.96%) and Andhra Pradesh (7.16%). Other states, such as Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, West Bengal, and those in the northeast (Tripura and Assam) account for the remaining productions. Though Kerala has the largest number of coconut trees, in terms of production per hectare, Tamil Nadu leads all other states. In Tamil Nadu, Coimbatore and Tirupur regions top the production list.
In Goa, the coconut tree has been reclassified by the government as a palm (like a grass), enabling farmers and real estate developers to clear land with fewer restrictions.
Maldives.
The coconut is the national tree of the Maldives and is considered the most important plant in the country. A coconut tree is also included in the country's national emblem or coat of arms. Coconut trees are grown on all the islands. Before modern construction methods were introduced, coconut leaves were used as roofing material for many houses in the islands, while coconut timber was used to build houses and boats.
Middle East.
The main coconut-producing area in the Middle East is the Dhofar region of Oman, but they can be grown all along the Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea and Red Sea coasts, because these seas are tropical and provide enough humidity (through seawater evaporation) for coconut trees to grow. The young coconut plants need to be nursed and irrigated with drip pipes until they are old enough (stem bulb development) to be irrigated with brackish water or seawater alone, after which they can be replanted on the beaches. In particular, the area around Salalah maintains large coconut plantations similar to those found across the Arabian Sea in Kerala. The reasons why coconut are cultivated only in Yemen's Al Mahrah and Hadramaut governorates and in the Sultanate of Oman, but not in other suitable areas in the Arabian Peninsula, may originate from the fact that Oman and Hadramaut had long dhow trade relations with Burma, Malaysia, Indonesia, East Africa and Zanzibar, as well as southern India and China. Omani people needed the coir rope from the coconut fiber to stitch together their traditional high seas-going dhow vessels in which nails were never used. The 'know how' of coconut cultivation and necessary soil fixation and irrigation may have found its way into Omani, Hadrami and Al-Mahra culture by people who returned from those overseas areas.
The coconut cultivars grown in Oman are generally of the drought-resistant Indian "West Coast tall" (WC Tall) variety. Unlike the UAE, which grows mostly non-native dwarf or hybrid coconut cultivars imported from Florida for ornamental purposes, the slender, tall Omani coconut cultivars are relatively well-adapted to the Middle East's hot dry seasons, but need longer to reach maturity. The Middle East's hot, dry climate favors the development of coconut mites, which cause immature seed dropping and may cause brownish-gray discoloration on the coconut's outer green fiber.
The ancient coconut groves of Dhofar were mentioned by the medieval Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta in his writings, known as "Al Rihla". The annual rainy season known locally as "Khareef" or monsoon makes coconut cultivation easy on the Arabian east coast.
Coconut trees also are increasingly grown for decorative purposes along the coasts of the UAE and Saudi Arabia with the help of irrigation. The UAE has, however, imposed strict laws on mature coconut tree imports from other countries to reduce the spread of pests to other native palm trees, as the mixing of date and coconut trees poses a risk of cross-species palm pests, such as rhinoceros beetles and red palm weevils. The artificial landscaping adopted in Florida may have been the cause for lethal yellowing, a viral coconut palm disease that leads to the death of the tree. It is spread by host insects, that thrive on heavy turf grasses. Therefore, heavy turf grass environments (beach resorts and golf courses) also pose a major threat to local coconut trees. Traditionally, dessert banana plants and local wild beach flora such as "Scaevola taccada" and "Ipomoea pes-caprae" were used as humidity-supplying green undergrowth for coconut trees, mixed with sea almond and sea hibiscus. Due to growing sedentary life styles and heavy-handed landscaping, there has been a decline in these traditional farming and soil-fixing techniques.
Sri Lanka.
An early mention of the planting of coconuts is found in the "Mahavamsa" during the reign of Agrabodhi II around 589 AD. Coconuts are common in the Sri Lankan diet and the main source of dietary fat.
United States.
In the United States coconut palms can be grown and reproduced outdoors without irrigation in Hawaii, southern and central Florida, and the territories of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
In Florida, coconut palms will grow from coastal Pinellas County and St. Petersburg southwards on Florida's west coast, and Melbourne southwards on Florida's east coast. The occasional coconut palm is seen north of these areas in favoured microclimates in Tampa and Clearwater, as well as around Cape Canaveral and Daytona Beach on the east coast. They reach fruiting maturity, but can be damaged or killed by the occasional winter freezes in these areas. In South Texas they may also be grown in favoured microclimates around the Rio Grande Valley near Brownsville, and as far north as Corpus Christi, however more severe cold snaps keep them from producing viable fruit.
Australia.
Coconuts are commonly grown around the northern coast of Australia, and in some warmer parts of New South Wales.
Bermuda.
Most of the tall mature coconut trees found in Bermuda were shipped to the island as seedlings on the decks of ships. In more recent years, the importation of coconuts was prohibited, therefore, a large proportion of the younger trees have been propagated from locally grown coconuts.
In the winter months, the growth rate of coconut trees declines due to cooler temperatures and people have commonly attributed this to the reduced yield of coconuts in comparison to tropical regions. However, whilst cooler winter temperatures may be a factor in reducing fruit production, the primary reason for the reduced yield is a lack of water. Bermuda's soil is generally very shallow (1.5 to 3 feet) and much of a coconut tree's root mass is found in the porous limestone underneath the soil. Due to the porosity of the limestone, Bermuda's coconut trees do not generally have a sufficient supply of water with which they are able to support a large number of fruit as rain water quickly drains down through the limestone layer to the water table which is far too deep for a coconut's roots to reach. This typically leads to a reduction in fruit yield (sometimes as little as one or two mature fruits) as well as a reduced milk content inside the coconut that often causes the fruit to be infertile.
Conversely, trees growing in close proximity to the sea almost universally yield a much greater volume of fruit as they are able to tap directly into the sea water which permeates the limestone in such areas. Not only do these trees produce a significantly higher yield, but also the fruit itself tends to be far more fertile due to the higher milk content. Trees found growing in Bermuda's marshy inland areas enjoy a similar degree of success as they are also able to tap directly into a constant supply of water.
Europe.
As a tropical plant, coconut is not native to Europe, but grows in pantropical coastal regions of the Mediterranean Basin and even as far north as coastal Norway.
Substitutes for cooler climates.
In cooler climates (but not less than USDA Zone 9), a similar palm, the queen palm ("Syagrus romanzoffiana"), is used in landscaping. Its fruits are similar to the coconut, but smaller. The queen palm was originally classified in the genus "Cocos" along with the coconut, but was later reclassified in "Syagrus". A recently discovered palm, "Beccariophoenix alfredii" from Madagascar, is nearly identical to the coconut, more so than the queen palm and can also be grown in slightly cooler climates than the coconut palm. Coconuts can only be grown in temperatures above and need a daily temperature above to produce fruit.
Uses.
The coconut palm is grown throughout the tropics for decoration, as well as for its many culinary and nonculinary uses; virtually every part of the coconut palm can be used by humans in some manner and has significant economic value. Coconuts' versatility is sometimes noted in its naming. In Sanskrit, it is "kalpa vriksha" ("the tree which provides all the necessities of life"). In the Malay language, it is "pokok seribu guna" ("the tree of a thousand uses"). In the Philippines, the coconut is commonly called the "tree of life".
Cooking.
The various parts of the coconut have a number of culinary uses. The seed provides oil for frying, cooking, and making margarine. The white, fleshy part of the seed, the coconut meat, is used fresh or dried in cooking, especially in confections and desserts such as macaroons. Desiccated coconut or coconut milk made from it is frequently added to curries and other savory dishes. Coconut flour has also been developed for use in baking, to combat malnutrition. Coconut chips have been sold in the tourist regions of Hawaii and the Caribbean. Coconut butter is often used to describe solidified coconut oil, but has also been adopted as a name by certain specialty products made of coconut milk solids or puréed coconut meat and oil. Dried coconut is also used as the filling for many chocolate bars. Some dried coconut is purely coconut but others are manufactured with other ingredients, such as sugar, propylene glycol, salt, and sodium metabisulfite. Some countries in South East Asia use special coconut mutant called Kopyor (in Indonesian) or macapuno (in Philippines) as a dessert drinks.
Nutrition.
Per 100 gram serving with 354 calories, raw coconut meat supplies a high amount of total fat (33 grams), especially saturated fat (89% of total fat) and carbohydrates (24 grams) (table). Micronutrients in significant content include the dietary minerals, manganese, iron, phosphorus and zinc (table).
Coconut water.
Coconut water serves as a suspension for the endosperm of the coconut during its nuclear phase of development. Later, the endosperm matures and deposits onto the coconut rind during the cellular phase. It is consumed throughout the humid tropics, and has been introduced into the retail market as a processed sports drink. Mature fruits have significantly less liquid than young, immature coconuts, barring spoilage. Coconut water can be fermented to produce coconut vinegar.
Per 100 gram (100 ml) serving, coconut water contains 19 calories and no significant content of essential nutrients.
Coconut milk.
Coconut milk, not to be confused with coconut water, is obtained primarily by extracting juice by pressing the grated coconut white kernel or by passing hot water or milk through grated coconut, which extracts the oil and aromatic compounds. It has a total fat content of 24%, most of which (89%) is saturated fat, with lauric acid as a major fatty acid. When refrigerated and left to set, coconut cream will rise to the top and separate from the milk. The milk can be used to produce virgin coconut oil by controlled heating and removal of the oil fraction.
A protein-rich powder can be processed from coconut milk following centrifugation, separation and spray drying.
Coconut oil.
Another byproduct of the coconut is coconut oil. It is commonly used in cooking, especially for frying. It can be used in liquid form as would other vegetable oils, or in solid form as would butter or lard.
Toddy and nectar.
The sap derived from incising the flower clusters of the coconut is drunk as "neera", also known as toddy or "tuba" (Philippines), "tuak" (Indonesia and Malaysia) or "karewe" (fresh and not fermented, collected twice a day, for breakfast and dinner) in Kiribati. When left to ferment on its own, it becomes palm wine. Palm wine is distilled to produce "arrack". In the Philippines, this alcoholic drink is called "lambanog" or "coconut vodka".
The sap can be reduced by boiling to create a sweet syrup or candy such as "te kamamai" in Kiribati or "dhiyaa hakuru" and "addu bondi" in the Maldives. It can be reduced further to yield coconut sugar also referred to as palm sugar or jaggery. A young, well-maintained tree can produce around of toddy per year, while a 40-year-old tree may yield around .
Heart of palm and coconut sprout.
Apical buds of adult plants are edible, and are known as "palm cabbage" or heart of palm. They are considered a rare delicacy, as harvesting the buds kills the palms. Hearts of palm are eaten in salads, sometimes called "millionaire's salad". Newly germinated coconuts contain an edible fluff of marshmallow-like consistency called coconut sprout, produced as the endosperm nourishes the developing embryo.
Indonesia.
Coconut is an indispensable ingredient in Indonesian cooking. Coconut meat, coconut milk and coconut water are often used in main courses, desserts and soups throughout the archipelago. In the island of Sumatra, the famous Rendang, the traditional beef stew from West Sumatra, chunks of beef are cooked in coconut milk along with other spices for hours until thickened. In Jakarta, "Soto Babat" or beef tripe soup also uses coconut milk. In the island of Java, the sweet and savoury "Tempe Bacem" is made by cooking tempeh with coconut water, coconut sugar and other spices until thickened. "Klapertart" is the famous Dutch-influenced dessert from Manado, North Celebes, that uses young coconut meat and coconut milk.
In 2010, Indonesia increased its coconut production. It is now the world's second largest producer of coconuts. The gross production was 15 million tonnes. A sprouting coconut seed is the logo for Gerakan Pramuka Indonesia, the Indonesian Scouting organization. It can be seen on all the scouting paraphernalia that elementary (SMA) school children wear as well as on the scouting pins and flags.
Philippines.
The Philippines is the world's second largest producer of coconuts; the production of coconuts plays an important role in the economy. Coconuts in the Philippines are usually used in making main dishes, refreshments and desserts. Coconut juice is also a popular drink in the country. In the Philippines, particularly Cebu, rice is wrapped in coconut leaves for cooking and subsequent storage; these packets are called "puso". Coconut milk, known as "gata", and grated coconut flakes are used in the preparation of dishes such as "laing", "ginataan", "bibingka", "ube halaya", "pitsi-pitsi", "palitaw", "buko" and coconut pie. Coconut jam is made by mixing muscovado sugar with coconut milk. Coconut sport fruits are also harvested. One such variety of coconut is known as "macapuno". Its meat is sweetened, cut into strands and sold in glass jars as coconut strings, sometimes labeled as "gelatinous mutant coconut". Coconut water can be fermented to make a different product—"nata de coco" (coconut gel).
Vietnam.
In Vietnam, coconut is grown abundantly across Central and Southern Vietnam, and especially in Bến Tre Province, often called the "land of the coconut". It is used to make coconut candy, caramel, and jelly. Coconut juice and coconut milk are used, especially in Vietnam's southern style of cooking, including "kho", "chè" and curry ("cà ri").
India.
In southern India, most common way of cooking vegetables is to add grated coconut and then steam them with spices fried in oil. People from southern India also make chutney, which involves grinding the coconut with salt, chillies, and whole spices. "Uruttu chammanthi" (granulated chutney) is eaten with rice or "kanji" (rice gruel). It is also invariably the main side dish served with "idli, vadai", and "dosai". Coconut ground with spices is also mixed in "sambar" and other various lunch dishes for extra taste. Dishes garnished with grated coconut are generally referred to as "poduthol" in North Malabar and "thoran" in rest of Kerala. "Puttu" is a culinary delicacy of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, in which layers of coconut alternate with layers of powdered rice, all of which fit into a bamboo stalk. Recently, this has been replaced with a steel or aluminium tube, which is then steamed over a pot. Coconut () is regularly broken in the middle-class families in Tamil Nadu for food. Coconut meat can be eaten as a snack sweetened with jaggery or molasses. In Karnataka sweets are prepared using coconut and dry coconut "copra"., Like Kaie Obattu, Kobri mitai etc.
Commercial, industrial, and household use.
Cultivars.
Coconut has a number of commercial and traditional cultivars. They can be sorted mainly into tall cultivars, dwarf cultivars and hybrid cultivars (hybrids between talls and dwarfs). Some of the dwarf cultivars such as "Malayan dwarf" has shown some promising resistance to lethal yellowing while other cultivars such as "Jamaican tall" is highly affected by the same plant disease. Some cultivars are more drought resistant such as "West coast tall" (India) while others such as "Hainan Tall" (China) are more cold tolerant. Other aspects such as seed size, shape and weight and copra thickness are also important factors in the selection of new cultivars. Some cultivars such as "Fiji dwarf" form a large bulb at the lower stem and others are cultivated to produce very sweet coconut water with orange coloured husks (king coconut) used entirely in fruit stalls for drinking (Sri Lanka, India).
Coir.
Coir (the fiber from the husk of the coconut) is used in ropes, mats, door mats, brushes, sacks, caulking for boats, and as stuffing fiber for mattresses. It is used in horticulture in potting compost, especially in orchid mix.
Coconut fronds.
The stiff mid-ribs of coconut leaves are used for making brooms in India, Indonesia ("sapu lidi"), Malaysia, the Maldives and the Philippines ("walis tingting"). The green of the leaves (lamina) are stripped away, leaving the veins (wood-like, thin, long strips) which are tied together to form a broom or brush. A long handle made from some other wood may be inserted into the base of the bundle and used as a two-handed broom. The leaves also provide material for baskets that can draw well water and for roofing thatch; they can be woven into mats, cooking skewers, and kindling arrows, as well. Two leaves (especially the younger, yellowish shoots) woven into a tight shell the size of the palm are filled with rice and cooked to make "ketupat". Dried coconut leaves can be burned to ash, which can be harvested for lime. In India, the woven coconut leaves are used as "pandals" (temporary sheds) for marriage functions especially in the states of Kerala, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu.
Copra.
Copra is the dried meat of the seed and after processing produces coconut oil and coconut meal. Coconut oil, aside from being used in cooking as an ingredient and for frying, is used in soaps, cosmetics, hair-oil, and massage oil. Coconut oil is also a main ingredient in Ayurvedic oils. In Vanuatu coconut palms for copra production are generally spaced 9 meters apart, allowing a tree density of 100–160 trees per hectare.
Husks and shells.
The husk and shells can be used for fuel and are a source of charcoal. Activated carbon manufactured from coconut shell is considered extremely effective for the removal of impurities. The coconut's obscure origin in foreign lands led to the notion of using cups made from the shell to neutralise poisoned drinks. The cups were frequently engraved and decorated with precious metals.
A dried half coconut shell with husk can be used to buff floors. It is known as a "bunot" in the Philippines and simply a "coconut brush" in Jamaica. The fresh husk of a brown coconut may serve as a dish sponge or body sponge. A coco chocolatero was a cup used to serve small quantities of beverages (such as chocolate drinks) between the 17th century and the 19th century in countries such as Mexico, Guatemala and Venezuela.
In Asia, coconut shells are also used as bowls and in the manufacture of various handicrafts, including buttons carved from dried shell. Coconut buttons are often used for Hawaiian aloha shirts. "Tempurung" as the shell is called in the Malay language can be used as a soup bowl and—if fixed with a handle—a ladle. In Thailand, the coconut husk is used as a potting medium to produce healthy forest tree saplings. The process of husk extraction from the coir bypasses the retting process, using a custom-built coconut husk extractor designed by ASEAN–Canada Forest Tree Seed Centre (ACFTSC) in 1986. Fresh husks contains more tannin than old husks. Tannin produces negative effects on sapling growth. In parts of South India, the shell and husk are burned for smoke to repel mosquitoes.
Half coconut shells are used in theatre Foley sound effects work, banged together to create the sound effect of a horse's hoofbeats. Dried half shells are used as the bodies of musical instruments, including the Chinese "yehu" and "banhu", along with the Vietnamese "đàn gáo" and Arabo-Turkic "rebab". In the Philippines, dried half shells are also used as a music instrument in a folk dance called "maglalatik".
In World War II, coastwatcher scout Biuki Gasa was the first of two from the Solomon Islands to reach the shipwrecked and wounded crew of Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 commanded by future U.S. president John F. Kennedy. Gasa suggested, for lack of paper, delivering by dugout canoe a message inscribed on a husked coconut shell. This coconut was later kept on the president's desk, and is now in the John F. Kennedy Library.
Coconut trunk.
Coconut trunks are used for building small bridges and huts; they are preferred for their straightness, strength, and salt resistance. In Kerala, coconut trunks are used for house construction. Coconut timber comes from the trunk, and is increasingly being used as an ecologically sound substitute for endangered hardwoods. It has applications in furniture and specialized construction, as notably demonstrated in Manila's Coconut Palace.
Hawaiians hollowed the trunk to form drums, containers, or small canoes. The "branches" (leaf petioles) are strong and flexible enough to make a switch. The use of coconut branches in corporal punishment was revived in the Gilbertese community on Choiseul in the Solomon Islands in 2005.
Roots.
The roots are used as a dye, a mouthwash, and a medicine for diarrhea and dysentery. A frayed piece of root can also be used as a toothbrush.
Beauty products.
Coconuts are used in the beauty industry in moisturisers and body butters because coconut oil, due to its chemical structure, is readily absorbed by the skin. The coconut shell may also be ground down and added to products for exfoliation of dead skin. Coconut is also a source of lauric acid, which can be processed in a particular way to produce sodium lauryl sulfate, a detergent used in shower gels and shampoos. The nature of lauric acid as a fatty acid makes it particularly effective for creating detergents and surfactants.
Religion.
In the Ilocos region of northern Philippines, the Ilocano people fill two halved coconut shells with "diket" (cooked sweet rice), and place "liningta nga itlog" (halved boiled egg) on top of it. This ritual, known as "niniyogan", is an offering made to the deceased and one's ancestors. This accompanies the "palagip" (prayer to the dead).
A coconut () is an essential element of rituals in Hindu tradition. Often it is decorated with bright metal foils and other symbols of auspiciousness. It is offered during worship to a Hindu god or goddess. Irrespective of their religious affiliations, fishermen of India often offer it to the rivers and seas in the hopes of having bountiful catches. Hindus often initiate the beginning of any new activity by breaking a coconut to ensure the blessings of the gods and successful completion of the activity. The Hindu goddess of well-being and wealth, Lakshmi, is often shown holding a coconut. In the foothills of the temple town of Palani, before going to worship Murugan for the Ganesha, coconuts are broken at a place marked for the purpose. Every day, thousands of coconuts are broken, and some devotees break as many as 108 coconuts at a time as per the prayer. In tantric practices, coconuts are sometimes used as substitutes for human skulls.
In Hindu wedding ceremonies, a coconut is placed over the opening of a pot, representing a womb. Coconut flowers are auspicious symbols and are fixtures at Hindu and Buddhist weddings and other important occasions. In Kerala, coconut flowers must be present during a marriage ceremony. The flowers are inserted into a barrel of unhusked rice (paddy) and placed within sight of the wedding ceremony. Similarly in Sri Lanka, coconut flowers, standing in brass urns, are placed in prominent positions.
The Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club of New Orleans traditionally throws hand-decorated coconuts, the most valuable of Mardi Gras souvenirs, to parade revelers. The "Tramps" began the tradition "circa" 1901. In 1987, a "coconut law" was signed by Gov. Edwards exempting from insurance liability any decorated coconut "handed" from a Zulu float.
The coconut is also used as a target and prize in the traditional British fairground game "coconut shy". The player buys some small balls which he throws as hard as he can at coconuts balanced on sticks. The aim is to knock a coconut off the stand and win it.
It was the main food of adherents of the now discontinued Vietnamese religion Đạo Dừa in Bến Tre.
Myths and legends.
Some South Asian, Southeast Asian and Pacific Ocean cultures have origin myths in which the coconut plays the main role. In the Hainuwele myth from Maluku, a girl emerges from the blossom of a coconut tree. In Maldivian folklore one of the main myths of origin reflects the dependence of the Maldivians on the coconut tree.
According to an urban legend, there are more deaths caused by falling coconuts than by sharks annually.
Other uses.
The leftover fiber from coconut oil and coconut milk production, coconut meal, is used as livestock feed. The dried calyx is used as fuel in wood-fired stoves. Coconut water is traditionally used as a growth supplement in plant tissue culture/micropropagation. The smell of coconuts comes from the 6-pentyloxan-2-one molecule, known as delta-decalactone in the food and fragrance industries.
Tool and shelter for animals.
Researchers from the Melbourne Museum in Australia observed the octopus species "Amphioctopus marginatus "use of tools, specifically coconut shells, for defense and shelter. The discovery of this behavior was observed in Bali and North Sulawesi in Indonesia between 1998 and 2008. "Amphioctopus marginatus" is the first invertebrate known to be able to use tools.
A coconut can be hollowed out and used as a home for a rodent or small birds. Halved, drained coconuts can also be hung up as bird feeders, and after the flesh has gone, can be filled with fat in winter to attract tits.
Allergies.
Food allergies.
Coconut can be a food allergen although its prevalence varies from country to country. While coconut is one of the top-five food allergies in India where it is a common food source, such allergies to coconut are considered rare in Australia, the UK, and the United States. As a result, commercial extracts of coconut are not currently available for skin prick testing in Australia or New Zealand.
Despite a low prevalence of allergies to coconut in the United States, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began identifying coconuts in October 2006. Based on FDA guidance and federal U.S. law, coconut must be disclosed as an ingredient.
Topical allergies.
Coconut-derived products can cause contact dermatitis. They can be present in cosmetics, including some shampoos, moisturizers, soaps, cleansers and hand washing liquids. Those known to cause contact dermatitis include: coconut diethanolamide, cocamide sulphate, cocamide DEA, CDEA, sodium laureth sulfate, sodium lauroyl sulfate, ammonium laureth sulfate, ammonium lauryl sulfate, sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, sodium cocoyl sarcosinate, potassium coco hydrolysed collagen, triethanolamine laureth sulfate, caprylic/capric triglycerides, triethanolamine lauryl or cocoyl sarcosime, disodium oleamide sulfocuccinate, laureth sulfasuccinate, and disodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate.

</doc>
<doc id="51347" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51347" title="620s BC">
620s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51348" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51348" title="630s BC">
630s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51349" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51349" title="640s BC">
640s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51350" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51350" title="650s BC">
650s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51351" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51351" title="660s BC">
660s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51352" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51352" title="670s BC">
670s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51353" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51353" title="680s BC">
680s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51354" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51354" title="690s BC">
690s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51355" title="700s BC (decade)">
700s BC (decade)


</doc>
<doc id="51356" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51356" title="710s BC">
710s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51357" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51357" title="Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins">
Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins

Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), or simply dioxins, are a group of polyhalogenated organic compounds that are significant environmental pollutants.
They are commonly but inaccurately referred to as dioxins for simplicity, because every PCDD molecule contains a dibenzo-1,4-dioxin skeletal structure, with 1,4-dioxin as the central ring. Members of the PCDD family bioaccumulate in humans and wildlife because of their lipophilic properties, and may cause developmental disturbances and cancer.
Dioxins occur as by-products in the manufacture of some organochlorides, in the incineration of chlorine-containing substances such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), in the chlorine bleaching of paper, and from natural sources such as volcanoes and forest fires. There have been many incidents of dioxin pollution resulting from industrial emissions and accidents; the earliest such incidents were in the mid 19th century during the Industrial Revolution.
The word "dioxins" may also refer to other similarly acting chlorinated compounds (see Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds).
Chemical structure of dibenzo-1,4-dioxins.
The structure of dibenzo-1,4-dioxin consists of two benzene rings joined by two oxygen bridges. This makes the compound an aromatic diether. The name dioxin formally refers to the central dioxygenated ring, which is stabilized by the two flanking benzene rings.
In PCDDs, chlorine atoms are attached to this structure at any of 8 different places on the molecule, at positions 1–4 and 6–9. There are 75 different PCDD congeners (that is, related dioxin compounds).
The toxicity of PCDDs depends on the number and positions of the chlorine atoms. Congeners that have chlorine in the 2, 3, 7, and 8 positions have been found to be significantly toxic. In fact, 7 congeners have chlorine atoms in the relevant positions which were considered toxic by the World Health Organization toxic equivalent (WHO-TEQ) scheme.
Historical perspective.
Low concentrations of dioxins existed in nature prior to industrialization as a result of natural combustion and geological processes. Dioxins were first unintentionally produced as by-products from 1848 onwards as Leblanc process plants started operating in Germany. The first intentional synthesis of chlorinated dibenzodioxin was in 1872. Today, concentrations of dioxins are found in all humans, with higher levels commonly found in persons living in more industrialized countries. The most toxic dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), became well known as a contaminant of Agent Orange, a herbicide used in the Malayan Emergency and the Vietnam War. Later, dioxins were found in Times Beach, Missouri and Love Canal, New York and Seveso, Italy. More recently, dioxins have been in the news with the poisoning of President Viktor Yushchenko of Ukraine in 2004, the Naples Mozzarella Crisis the 2008 Irish pork crisis, and the German feed incident of 2010.
Sources of dioxins.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency inventory of sources of dioxin-like compounds is possibly the most comprehensive review of the sources and releases of dioxins, but other countries now have substantial research as well.
Occupational exposure is an issue for some in the chemical industries, historically for those making chlorophenols or chlorophenoxy acid herbicides or in the application of chemicals, notably herbicides. In many developed nations there are now emissions regulations which have dramatically decreased the emissions and thus alleviated some concerns, although the lack of continuous sampling of dioxin emissions causes concern about the understatement of emissions. In Belgium, through the introduction of a process called AMESA, continuous sampling showed that periodic sampling understated emissions by a factor of 30 to 50 times. Few facilities have continuous sampling.
Dioxins are produced in small concentrations when organic material is burned in the presence of chlorine, whether the chlorine is present as chloride ions or as organochlorine compounds, so they are widely produced in many contexts. According to the most recent US EPA data, the major sources of dioxins are broadly in the following types:
When first carried out in 1987, the original US EPA inventory of dioxin sources revealed that incineration represented more than 80% of known dioxin sources. As a result, US EPA implemented new emissions requirements. These regulations succeeded in reducing dioxin stack emissions from incinerators. Incineration of municipal solid waste, medical waste, sewage sludge, and hazardous waste together now produce less than 3% of all dioxin emissions. Since 1987, however, backyard barrel burning has showed almost no decrease, and is now the largest source of dioxin emissions, producing about one third of the total output.
In incineration, dioxins can also reform or form "de novo" in the atmosphere above the stack as the exhaust gases cool through a temperature window of 600 to 200 °C. The most common method of reducing the quantity of dioxins reforming or forming "de novo" is through rapid (30 millisecond) quenching of the exhaust gases through that 400 °C window. Incinerator emissions of dioxins have been reduced by over 90% as a result of new emissions control requirements. Incineration in developed countries is now a very minor contributor to dioxin emissions.
Dioxins are also generated in reactions that do not involve burning — such as chlorine bleaching fibers for paper or textiles, and in the manufacture of chlorinated phenols, particularly when reaction temperature is not well controlled. Compounds involved include the wood preservative pentachlorophenol, and also herbicides such as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (or 2,4-D) and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T). Higher levels of chlorination require higher reaction temperatures and greater dioxin production. Dioxins may also be formed during the photochemical breakdown of the common antimicrobial compound triclosan.
Sources of human intake.
Tolerable daily, monthly or annual intakes have been set by the World Health Organization and a number of governments. Dioxins enter the general population almost exclusively from ingestion of food, specifically through the consumption of fish, meat, and dairy products since dioxins are fat-soluble and readily climb the food chain.
Children are passed substantial body burdens by their mothers, and breastfeeding increases the child's body burden. Dioxin exposure can also occur from contact with Pentachlorophenol (Penta) treated lumber as Pentachlorophenol often contains dioxins as a contaminant.Children's daily intakes during breast feeding are often many times above the intakes of adults based on body weight. This is why the WHO consultation group assessed the tolerable intake so as to prevent a woman from accumulating harmful body burdens before her first pregnancy. Breast fed children usually still have higher dioxin body burdens than non breast fed children. The WHO still recommends breast feeding for its other benefits. In many countries dioxins in breast milk have decreased by even 90% during the two last decades.
Dioxins are present in cigarette smoke. Dioxin in cigarette smoke was noted as "understudied" by the US EPA in its "Re-Evaluating Dioxin" (1995). In that same document, the US EPA acknowledged that dioxin in cigarettes is "anthropogenic" (man-made, "not likely in nature").
Metabolism.
Dioxins are absorbed primarily through dietary intake of fat, as this is where they accumulate in animals and humans. In humans, the highly chlorinated dioxins are stored in fatty tissues and are neither readily metabolized nor excreted. The estimated elimination half-life for highly chlorinated dioxins (4–8 chlorine atoms) in humans ranges from 4.9 to 13.1 years.
The persistence of a particular dioxin congener in an animal is thought to be a consequence of its structure. Dioxins with no lateral (2, 3, 7, and 8) chlorines, which thus contain hydrogen atoms on adjacent pairs of carbons, can more readily be oxidized by cytochromes P450. The oxidized dioxins can then be more readily excreted rather than stored for a long time.
Toxicity.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) is considered the most toxic of the congeners (for the mechanism of action, see 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin and Aryl hydrocarbon receptor). Other dioxin congeners including PCDFs and PCBs with dioxin-like toxicity, are given a toxicity rating from 0 to 1, where TCDD = 1 (see Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds). This toxicity rating is called the Toxic Equivalence Factor concept, or TEF. TEFs are consensus values and, because of the strong species dependence for toxicity, are listed separately for mammals, fish, and birds. TEFs for mammalian species are generally applicable to human risk calculations. The TEFs have been developed from detailed assessment of literature data to facilitate both risk assessment and regulatory control. Many other compounds may also have dioxin-like properties, particularly non-ortho PCBs, one of which has a TEF as high as 0.1.
The total dioxin toxic equivalence (TEQ) value expresses the toxicity as if the mixture were pure TCDD. The TEQ approach and current TEFs have been adopted internationally as the most appropriate way to estimate the potential health risks of mixture of dioxins. Recent data suggest that this type of simple scaling factor may not be the most appropriate treatment for complex mixtures of dioxins; both transfer from the source and absorption and elimination vary among different congeners, and the TEF value is not able to accurately reflect this.
Dioxins and other persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are subject to the Stockholm Convention. The treaty obliges signatories to take measures to eliminate where possible, and minimize where not possible to eliminate, all sources of dioxin.
Health effects in humans.
Dioxins build up primarily in fatty tissues over time (bioaccumulation), so even small exposures may eventually reach dangerous levels. In 1994, the US EPA reported that dioxins are a probable carcinogen, but noted that non-cancer effects (reproduction and sexual development, immune system) may pose a greater threat to human health. TCDD, the most toxic of the dibenzodioxins, is classified as a Group 1 carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). TCDD has a half-life of approximately 8 years in humans, although at high concentrations, the elimination rate is enhanced by metabolism. The health effects of dioxins are mediated by their action on a cellular receptor, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).
Exposure to high levels of dioxins in humans causes a severe form of persistent acne, known as chloracne. High occupational or accidental levels of exposures to dioxins have been shown by epidemiological studies to lead to an increased risk of tumors at all sites. Other effects in humans (at high dose levels) may include:
Recent studies have shown that high exposure to dioxins changes the ratio of male to female births among a population such that more females are born than males.
Dioxins accumulate in food chains in a fashion similar to other chlorinated compounds (bioaccumulation). This means that even small concentrations in contaminated water can be concentrated up a food chain to dangerous levels because of the long biological half life and low water solubility of dioxins.
Toxic effects in animals.
While it has been difficult to establish specific health effects in humans due to the lack of controlled dose experiments, studies in animals have shown that dioxin causes a wide variety of toxic effects. In particular, TCDD (see this) has been shown to be teratogenic, mutagenic, carcinogenic, immunotoxic, and hepatotoxic. Furthermore, alterations in multiple endocrine and growth factor systems have been reported. The most sensitive effects, observed in multiple species, appear to be developmental, including effects on the developing immune, nervous, and reproductive systems. The most sensitive effects are caused at body burdens relatively close to those reported in humans.
Among the animals for which TCDD toxicity has been studied, there is strong evidence for the following effects:
The LD50 of dioxin also varies wildly between species with the most notable disparity being between the ostensibly similar species of hamster and guinea pig. The oral LD50 for guinea pigs is as low as 0.5 to 2 μg/Kg body weight, whereas the oral LD50 for hamsters can be as high as 1 to 5 mg/Kg body weight, a difference of as much as thousandfold or more, and even among rat strains there may be thousandfold differences.
Agent Orange.
Agent Orange was the code name for one of the herbicides and defoliants the U.S. military as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand, during the Vietnam War from 1961 to 1971. It was a mixture of 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D. The 2,4,5-T used was contaminated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), an extremely toxic dioxin compound.
During the Vietnam war, between 1962 and 1971, the United States military sprayed of chemical herbicides and defoliants in Vietnam, eastern Laos and parts of Cambodia, as part of Operation Ranch Hand.
By 1971, 12% of the total area of South Vietnam had been sprayed with defoliating chemicals, which were often applied at rates that were 13 times as high as the legal USDA limit. In South Vietnam alone, an estimated 10 million hectares of agricultural land were ultimately destroyed. In some areas, TCDD concentrations in soil and water were hundreds of times greater than the levels considered safe by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
According to Vietnamese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 4.8 million Vietnamese people were exposed to Agent Orange, resulting in 400,000 people being killed or maimed, and 500,000 children born with birth defects. The Red Cross of Vietnam estimates that up to 1 million people are disabled or have health problems due to contaminated Agent Orange. The United States government has challenged these figures as being unreliable and unrealistically high.
Dioxin testing.
The analyses used to determine these compounds' relative toxicity share common elements that differ from methods used for more traditional analytical determinations. The preferred methods for dioxins and related analyses use high resolution gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (HRGC/HRMS). Concentrations are determined by measuring the ratio of the analyte to the appropriate isotopically labeled internal standard.
Also novel bio-assays like DR CALUX are nowadays used in identification of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. The advantage in respect to HRGC/HRMS is that it is able to scan many samples at lower costs. Also it is able to detect all compounds that interact with the Ah-receptor which is responsible for carcinogenic effects.

</doc>
<doc id="51359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51359" title="500 BC">
500 BC

__NOTOC__
The year 500 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camerinus and Longus (or, less frequently, year 254 " Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 500 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Africa.
Egypt Started In 500 BC

</doc>
<doc id="51360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51360" title="486 BC">
486 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 486 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Viscellinus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 268 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 486 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Art.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51361" title="480 BC">
480 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 480 BCE was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vibulanus and Cincinnatus (or, less frequently, year 274 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 480 BCE for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51362" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51362" title="430s BC">
430s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51363" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51363" title="History of the Caribbean">
History of the Caribbean

The history of the Caribbean reveals the significant role the region played in the colonial struggles of the European powers since the 15th century. In the 20th century the Caribbean was again important during World War II, in the decolonization wave during the post-war period, and in the tension between Communist Cuba and the United States. Genocide, slavery, immigration and rivalry between world powers have given Caribbean history an impact disproportionate to the size of this small region.
Before European contact.
The oldest evidence of human settlement in the Caribbean has been found at Ortoiroid sites on Trinidad dating to the mid-6th . They had reached Hispaniola and Cuba by the mid-5th , where their society is also known as the Casirimoid. The hunter-gatherer Guanahatabey present in western Cuba at the time of Columbus's arrival may have represented a continuation of their culture or more recent arrivals from southern Florida or the Yucatan.
The islands were then repopulated by successive waves of invaders travelling south to north from initial bases in the Orinoco River valley. Between 400 and , the Saladoid spread north from Trinidad, introducing agriculture and ceramic pottery. Sometime after , the Barrancoid followed and replaced them on Trinidad. This society's settlements in the Orinoco collapsed around 650 and another group, the Arauquinoid (the later "Taíno" or "Arawaks"), expanded into the area and northward along the island chain. Around 1200 or 1300, a fourth group, the Mayoid (the later "Caribs"), entered Trinidad. They remained dominant until the Spanish conquest.
At the time of the European arrival, three major Amerindian indigenous peoples lived on the islands: the Taíno in the Greater Antilles, The Bahamas and the Leeward Islands; the Island Caribs and Galibi in the Windward Islands; and the Ciboney in western Cuba. The Taínos are subdivided into Classic Taínos, who occupied Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, Western Taínos, who occupied Cuba, Jamaica, and the Bahamian archipelago, and the Eastern Taínos, who occupied the Leeward Islands. Trinidad was inhabited by both Carib speaking and Arawak-speaking groups.
New scientific DNA studies have changed some of the traditional beliefs about pre-Columbian indigenous history. Juan Martinez Cruzado, a geneticist from the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez designed an island-wide DNA survey of Puerto Rico's people. According to conventional historical belief, Puerto Ricans have mainly Spanish ethnic origins, with some African ancestry, and distant and less significant indigenous ancestry. Cruzado's research revealed surprising results in 2003. It found that, in fact, 61 percent of all Puerto Ricans have Amerindian mitochondrial DNA, 27 percent have African and 12 percent Caucasian.
Colonial era.
Soon after the voyages of Christopher Columbus to the Americas, both Portuguese and Spanish ships began claiming territories in Central and South America. These colonies brought in gold, and other European powers, most specifically England, the Netherlands, and France, hoped to establish profitable colonies of their own. Imperial rivalries made the Caribbean a contested area during European wars for centuries.
Spanish conquest.
During the first voyage of the explorer Christopher Columbus (mandated by the Spanish crown to conquer) contact was made with the Lucayans in the Bahamas and the Taíno in Cuba and the northern coast of Hispaniola, and a few of the native people were taken back to Spain. Small amounts of gold were found in their personal ornaments and other objects such as masks and belts. The Spanish, who came seeking wealth, enslaved the native population and rapidly drove them to near-extinction. To supplement the Amerindian labor, the Spanish imported African slaves. (see also Slavery in the Spanish New World colonies) Although Spain claimed the entire Caribbean, they settled only the larger islands of Hispaniola (1493), Puerto Rico (1508), Jamaica (1509), Cuba (1511), and Trinidad (1530), although the Spanish made an exception in the case of the small 'pearl islands' of Cubagua and Margarita off the Venezuelan coast because of their valuable pearl beds which were worked extensively between 1508 and 1530.
Other European powers.
The other European powers established a presence in the Caribbean after the Spanish Empire declined, partly due to the reduced native population of the area from European diseases. The Dutch, the French, and the British followed one another to the region and established a long-term presence. They brought with them millions of slaves imported from Africa to support the tropical plantation system that spread through the Caribbean islands.
Slaves in the Caribbean.
The development of agriculture in the Caribbean required a large workforce of manual labourers, which the Europeans found by taking advantage of the slave trade in Africa. The Atlantic slave trade brought African slaves to British, Dutch, French, Portuguese and Spanish colonies in the Americas, including the Caribbean. Slaves were brought to the Caribbean from the early 16th century until the end of the 19th century. The majority of slaves were brought to the Caribbean colonies between 1701 and 1810. Also in 1816 there was a slave revolution in the colony of Barbados.
The following table lists the number of slaves brought into some of the Caribbean colonies:
Abolitionists in the Americas and in Europe became vocal opponents of the slave trade throughout the 19th century. The importation of slaves to the colonies was often outlawed years before the end of the institution of slavery itself. It was well into the 19th century before many slaves in the Caribbean were legally free. The trade in slaves was abolished in the British Empire through the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act in 1807. Men, women and children who were already enslaved in the British Empire remained slaves, however, until Britain passed the Slavery Abolition Act in 1833. When the Slavery Abolition Act came into force in 1834, roughly 700,000 slaves in the British West Indies immediately became free; other enslaved workers were freed several years later after a period of forced apprenticeship. Slavery was abolished in the Dutch Empire in 1814. Spain abolished slavery in its empire in 1811, with the exceptions of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Santo Domingo; Spain ended the slave trade to these colonies in 1817, after being paid ₤400,000 by Britain. Slavery itself was not abolished in Cuba until 1886. France abolished slavery in its colonies in 1848.
Marriage, separation, and sale together.
"The official plantocratic view of slave marriage sought to deny the slaves any loving bonds or long-standing relationships, thus conveniently rationalising the indiscriminate separation of close kin through sales." "From the earliest days of slavery, indiscriminate sales and separation severely disrupted the domestic life of individual slaves." Slaves could be sold so that spouses could be sold separately. "Slave couples were sometimes separated by sale ... They lived as single slaves or as part of maternal or extended families but considered themselves 'married. Sale of estates with "stock" to pay debts, more common in the late period of slavery, was criticized as separating slave spouses. William Beckford argued for "families to be sold together or kept as near as possible in the same neighbourhood" and "laws were passed in the late period of slavery to prevent the breakup of slave families by sale, ... these laws were frequently ignored". "Slaves frequently reacted strongly to enforced severance of their emotional bonds", feeling "sorrow and despair", sometimes, according to Thomas Cooper in 1820, resulting in death from distress. John Stewart argued against separation as leading slave buyers to regret it because of utter or period to their lives. Separated slaves often used free time to travel long distances to reunite for a night and sometimes runaway slaves were married couples. However, "sale of slaves and the resulting breakup of families decreased as slave plantations lost prosperity."
Colonial laws.
European plantations required laws to regulate the plantation system and the many slaves imported to work on the plantations. This legal control was the most oppressive for slaves inhabiting colonies where they outnumbered their European masters and where rebellion was persistent, such as Jamaica. During the early colonial period, rebellious slaves were harshly punished, with sentences including death by torture; less serious crimes such as assault, theft or persistent escape attempts were commonly punished with mutilations, such as the cutting off of a hand or a foot.
Under British rule, slaves could only be freed with the consent of their master, and therefore freedom for slaves was rare. British colonies were able to establish laws through their own legislatures, and the assent of the local island governor and the Crown. British law considered slaves to be property, and thus did not recognize marriage for slaves, family rights, education for slaves, or the right to religious practises such as holidays. British law denied all rights to freed slaves, with the exception of the right to a jury trial. Otherwise, freed slaves had no right to own property, vote or hold office, or even enter some trades.
The French Empire regulated slaves under the Code Noir (Black Code) which was in force throughout the empire, but which was based upon French practises in the Caribbean colonies. French law recognized slave marriages, but only with the consent of the master. French law, like Spanish law, gave legal recognition to marriages between European men and black or Creole women. French and Spanish laws were also significantly more lenient than British law in recognizing manumission, or the ability of a slave to purchase their freedom and become a "freeman". Under French law, free slaves gained full rights to citizenship. The French also extended limited legal rights to slaves, for example the right to own property, and the right to enter contracts.
Impact of colonialism on the Caribbean.
Economic exploitation.
The exploitation of the Caribbean landscape dates back to the Spanish conquistadors around 1600 who mined the islands for gold which they brought back to Spain. The more significant development came when Christopher Columbus wrote back to Spain that the islands were made for sugar development. The history of Caribbean agricultural dependency is closely linked with European colonialism which altered the financial potential of the region by introducing a plantation system. Much like the Spanish enslaved indigenous Indians to work in gold mines, the 17th century brought a new series of oppressors in the form of the Dutch, the English, and the French. By the middle of the 18th century sugar was Britain's largest import which made the Caribbean that much more important as a colony.
Sugar was a luxury in Europe prior to the 18th century. It became widely popular in the 18th century, then graduated to becoming a necessity in the 19th century. This evolution of taste and demand for sugar as an essential food ingredient unleashed major economic and social changes. Caribbean islands with plentiful sunshine, abundant rainfalls and no extended frosts were well suited for sugarcane agriculture and sugar factories.
Following the emancipation of slaves in 1833 in the United Kingdom, many liberated Africans left their former masters. This created an economic chaos for British owners of Caribbean sugar cane plantations. The hard work in hot, humid farms required a regular, docile and low-waged labour force. The British looked for cheap labour. This they found initially in China and then mostly in India. The British crafted a new legal system of forced labour, which in many ways resembled enslavement. Instead of calling them slaves, they were called indentured labour. Indians and southeast Asians, began to replace Africans previously brought as slaves, under this indentured labour scheme to serve on sugarcane plantations across the British empire. The first ships carrying indentured labourers for sugarcane plantations left India in 1836. Over the next 70 years, numerous more ships brought indentured labourers to the Caribbean, as cheap and docile labor for harsh inhumane work. The slave labor and indentured labor - both in millions of people - were brought into Caribbean, as in other European colonies throughout the world.
The New World plantations were established in order to fulfill the growing needs of the Old World. The sugar plantations were built with the intention of exporting the sugar back to Britain which is why the British did not need to stimulate local demand for the sugar with wages. A system of slavery was adapted since it allowed the colonizer to have an abundant work force with little worry about declining demands for sugar. In the 19th century wages were finally introduced with the abolition of slavery. The new system in place however was similar to the previous as it was based on white capital and colored labor. Large numbers of unskilled workers were hired to perform repeated tasks, which made if very difficult for these workers to ever leave and pursue any non farming employment. Unlike other countries, where there was an urban option for finding work, the Caribbean countries had money invested in agriculture and lacked any core industrial base. The cities that did exist offered limited opportunities to citizens and almost none for the unskilled masses who had worked in agriculture their entire lives. The products produced brought in no profits for the countries since they were sold to the colonial occupant buyer who controlled the price the products were sold at. This resulted in extremely low wages with no potential for growth since the occupant nations had no intention of selling the products at a higher price to themselves.
The result of this economic exploitation was a plantation dependence which saw the Caribbean nations possessing a large quantity of unskilled workers capable of performing agricultural tasks and not much else. After many years of colonial rule the nations also saw no profits brought into their country since the sugar production was controlled by the colonial rulers. This left the Caribbean nations with little capital to invest towards enhancing any future industries unlike European nations which were developing rapidly and separating themselves technologically and economically from most impoverished nations of the world.
Wars.
The Caribbean region was war-torn throughout much of colonial history, but the wars were often based in Europe, with only minor battles fought in the Caribbean. Some wars, however, were borne of political turmoil in the Caribbean itself.
Piracy in the Caribbean was often a tool used by the European empires to wage war unofficially against one another. Gold plundered from Spanish ships and brought to Britain had a pivotal effect on European interest in colonizing the region.
Slave rebellions.
The plantation system and the slave trade that enabled its growth led to regular slave resistance in many Caribbean islands throughout the colonial era. Resistance was made by escaping from the plantations altogether, and seeking refuge in the areas free of European settlement. Communities of escaped slaves, who were known as Maroons, banded together in heavily forested and mountainous areas of the Greater Antilles and some of the islands of the Lesser Antilles. The spread of the plantations and European settlement often meant the end of many Maroon communities, although they survived on Saint Vincent and Dominica, and in the more remote mountainous areas of Jamaica, Hispaniola, Guadeloupe and Cuba.
Violent resistance broke out periodically on the larger Caribbean islands. Many more conspiracies intended to create rebellions were discovered and ended by Europeans before they could materialize. Actual violent uprisings, involving anywhere from dozens to thousands of slaves, were regular events, however. Jamaica and Cuba in particular had many slave uprisings. Such uprisings were brutally crushed by European forces.
Caribbean slave uprisings (1522–1844).
The following table lists slave rebellions that resulted in actual violent uprisings:
Independence.
Haiti, the former French colony of Saint-Domingue on Hispaniola, was the first Caribbean nation to gain independence from European powers in 1804. This followed 13 years of warfare which commenced as a slave uprising in 1791 and quickly became the Haitian Revolution under the leadership of Toussaint l'Ouverture, where the former slaves defeated the French army (twice), the Spanish army, and the British army, before becoming the world's first and oldest black republic, and also the second-oldest republic in the Western Hemisphere after the United States. This is additionally notable as being the only successful slave uprising in history. The remaining two-thirds of Hispaniola were conquered by Haitian forces in 1821. In 1844, the newly formed Dominican Republic declared its independence from Haiti.
The nations bordering the Caribbean in Central America gained independence with the 1821 establishment of the First Mexican Empire—which at that time included the modern states of Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. The nations bordering the Caribbean in South America also gained independence from Spain in 1821 with the establishment of Gran Colombia—which comprised the modern states of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Panama.
Cuba and Puerto Rico remained a Spanish colonies until the Spanish–American War in 1898, after which Cuba attained its independence in 1902, and Puerto Rico became an unincorporated territory of the United States, being the last of the Greater Antilles under colonial control.
Between 1958 and 1962 most of the British-controlled Caribbean was integrated as the new West Indies Federation in an attempt to create a single unified future independent state—but it failed. The following former British Caribbean island colonies achieved independence in their own right; Jamaica (1962), Trinidad & Tobago (1962), Barbados (1966), Bahamas (1973), Grenada (1974), Dominica (1978), St. Lucia (1979), St. Vincent (1979), Antigua & Barbuda (1981), St. Kitts & Nevis (1983).
In addition British Honduras in Central America became independent as Belize (1981), British Guiana in South America became independent as Guyana (1966), and Dutch Guiana also in South America became independent as Suriname (1975).
Islands currently under European or United States administration.
It should be noted that as of the early 21st century, not all Caribbean islands have become independent. Several islands continue to have government ties with European countries, or with the United States.
French overseas departments and territories include several Caribbean islands. Guadeloupe and Martinique are French overseas regions, a legal status that they have had since 1946. Their citizens are considered full French citizens with the same legal rights. In 2003, the populations of St. Martin and St. Barthélemy voted in favour of secession from Guadeloupe in order to form separate overseas collectivities of France. After a bill was passed in the French Parliament, the new status took effect on 22 February 2007.
Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands are officially insular areas of the United States, but are sometimes referred to as "protectorates" of the United States. They are administered by the Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) within the United States Department of Interior.
British overseas territories in the Caribbean include:
Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten are all presently separate constituent countries, formerly part of the Netherlands Antilles. Along with Netherlands, they form the four constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Citizens of these islands have full Dutch citizenship.
History of relations with the US.
Since the Monroe Doctrine, the United States gained a major influence on most Caribbean nations. In the early part of the twentieth century this influence was extended by participation in The Banana Wars. Areas outside British or French control became known in Europe as "America's tropical empire".
Victory in the Spanish–American War and the signing of the Platt amendment in 1901 ensured that the United States would have the right to interfere in Cuban political and economic affairs, militarily if necessary. After the Cuban revolution of 1959 relations deteriorated rapidly leading to the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Missile Crisis and successive US attempts to destabilise the island. The US invaded and occupied Hispaniola (present day Dominican Republic and Haiti) for 19 years (1915–34), subsequently dominating the Haitian economy through aid and loan repayments. The US invaded Haiti again in 1994 and in 2004 were accused by CARICOM of arranging a coup d'état to remove elected Haitian leader Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In 1965, 23,000 US troops were sent to the Dominican Republic to quash a local uprising against military rule. President Lyndon Johnson had ordered the invasion to stem what he claimed to be a "Communist threat", however the mission appeared ambiguous and was roundly condemned throughout the hemisphere as a return to gunboat diplomacy. In 1983 the US invaded Grenada to remove populist left-wing leader Maurice Bishop. The US maintains a naval military base in Cuba at Guantanamo Bay. The base is one of five unified commands whose "area of responsibility" is Latin America and the Caribbean. The command is headquartered in a Miami, Florida office building.
As an arm of the economic and political network of the Americas, the influence of the United States stretches beyond a military context. In economic terms, the United States represents a primary market for the export of Caribbean goods. Notably, this is a recent historical trend. The post-war era reflects a time of transition for the Caribbean basin when, as colonial powers sought to disentangle from the region (as part of a larger trend of decolonization), the US began to expand its hegemony throughout the region. This pattern is confirmed by economic initiatives such as the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), which sought to congeal alliances with the region in light of a perceived Soviet threat. The CBI marks the emergence of the Caribbean basin as a geopolitical area of strategic interest to the US.
This relationship has carried through to the 21st century, as reflected by the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act. The Caribbean Basin is also of strategic interest in regards to trade routes; it has been estimated that nearly half of US foreign cargo and crude oil imports are brought via Caribbean seaways. During wartime, these figures only stand to increase. It is important to note that the US is also of strategic interest to the Caribbean. Caribbean foreign policy seeks to strengthen its participation in a global free market economy. As an extension of this, Caribbean states do not wish to be excluded from their primary market in the US, or be bypassed in the creation of “wider hemispheric trading blocs” that stand to drastically alter trade and production in the Caribbean Basin. As such, the US has played an influential role in shaping the Caribbean’s role in this hemispheric market. Likewise, building trade relationships with the US has always figured in strongly with the political goal of economic security in post-independence Caribbean states.
Economic change in the 20th century.
The mainstay of the Caribbean economy, sugar, has declined gradually since the beginning of the 20th century, although it is still a major crop in the region. Caribbean sugar production became relatively expensive in comparison to other parts of the world that developed their own sugar cultivation industries, making it difficult for Caribbean sugar products to compete. Caribbean economic diversification into new activities became essential to the islands.
Tourism.
By the beginning of the 20th century, the Caribbean islands enjoyed greater political stability. Large-scale violence was no longer a threat after the end of slavery in the islands. The British-controlled islands in particular benefited from investments in the infrastructure of colonies. By the beginning of World War I, all British-controlled islands had their own police force, fire department, doctors and at least one hospital. Sewage systems and public water supplies were built, and death rates in the islands dropped sharply. Literacy also increased significantly during this period, as schools were set up for students descended from African slaves. Public libraries were established in large towns and capital cities.
These improvements in the quality of life for the inhabitants also made the islands a much more attractive destination for visitors. Tourists began to visit the Caribbean in larger numbers by the beginning of the 20th century, although there was a tourist presence in the region as early as the 1880s. The United States-owned United Fruit Company operated a fleet of "banana boats" in the region that doubled as tourist transportation. The United Fruit Company also developed hotels for tourist accommodations. It soon became apparent, however, that this industry was much like a new form of colonialism; the hotels operated by the company were fully staffed by Americans, from chefs to waitresses, in addition to being owned by Americans, so that the local populations saw little economic benefit. The company also enforced racial discrimination in many policies for its fleet. Black passengers were assigned to inferior cabins, were sometimes denied bookings, and were expected to eat meals early before white passengers. The most popular early destinations were Jamaica and the Bahamas; the Bahamas remains today the most popular tourist destination in the Caribbean.
Post-independence economic needs, particularly in the aftermath of the end of preferential agricultural trade ties with Europe, led to a boom in the development of the tourism industry in the 1980s and thereafter. Large luxury hotels and resorts have been built by foreign investors in many of the islands. Cruise ships are also regular visitors to the Caribbean.
Some islands have gone against this trend, such as Cuba and Haiti, whose governments chose not to pursue foreign tourism, although Cuba has developed this part of the economy very recently. Other islands lacking sandy beaches, such as Dominica, missed out on the 20th century tourism boom, although they have recently begun to develop eco-tourism businesses, thus diversifying tourism options in the Caribbean.
Financial services.
The development of offshore banking services began during the 1920s. The close proximity of the Caribbean islands to the United States has made them an attractive location for branches of foreign banks. Clients from the United States take advantage of offshore banking services to avoid U.S. taxation. The Bahamas entered the financial services industry first, and continues to be at the forefront of financial services in the region. The Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, and the Netherlands Antilles have also developed competitive financial services industries.
Shipping.
Ports both large and small were built throughout the Caribbean during the colonial era. The export of sugar on a large scale made the Caribbean one of the world's shipping cornerstones, as it remains today. Many key shipping routes still pass through the region.
The development of large-scale shipping to compete with other ports in Central and South America ran into several obstacles during the 20th century. Economies of scale, high port handling charges, and a reluctance by Caribbean governments to privatize ports put Caribbean shipping at a disadvantage. Many locations in the Caribbean are suitable for the construction of deep water ports for commercial ship container traffic, or to accommodate large cruise ships. The deep water port at Bridgetown, Barbados, was completed by British investors in 1961. A more recent deep water port project was completed by Hong Kong investors in Grand Bahama in the Bahamas.
Some Caribbean islands take advantage of flag of convenience policies followed by foreign merchant fleets, registering the ships in Caribbean ports. The registry of ships at "flag of convenience" ports is protected by the Law of the Sea and other international treaties. These treaties leave the enforcement of labour, tax, health and safety, and environmental laws under the control of the registry, or "flag" country, which in practical terms means that such regulations seldom result in penalties against the merchant ship. The Cayman Islands, Bahamas, Antigua, Bermuda and St. Vincent are among the top 11 flags of convenience in the world. However, the flag of convenience practice has been a disadvantage to Caribbean islands as well, since it also applies to cruise ships, which register outside the Caribbean and thus can evade Caribbean enforcement of the same territorial laws and regulations.

</doc>
<doc id="51364" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51364" title="420s BC">
420s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51365" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51365" title="History of Central America">
History of Central America

The history of Central America is the study of the region known as Central America.
Before European contact.
In the Pre-Columbian era, the northern areas of Central America were inhabited by the indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica. Most notable among these were the Mayans, who had built numerous cities throughout the region, and the Aztecs, who had created a vast empire. The pre-Columbian cultures of eastern El Salvador, eastern Honduras, Caribbean Nicaragua, most of Costa Rica and Panama were predominantly speakers of the Chibchan languages at the time of European contact and are considered by some culturally different and grouped in the Isthmo-Colombian Area.
Spanish Colonial Era.
Central America is composed of seven independent nations: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. After the Spanish conquest in the 16th century, most of the inhabitants of Central America shared a similar history. The exception was the Western Caribbean Zone, which included the Caribbean coast and encompassed both semi-independent indigenous polities, runaway slave communities, and settlers, especially British settlers who would eventually form British Honduras (the modern-day nation of Belize), a sparsely populated area that was inhabited by the British through the Treaty of Madrid from Spain. When Spain failed to regain control over British Honduras, the British continued to inhabit the country, and eventually colonized it. When Guatemala gained its independence, they assumed inheritance of British Honduras from Spain. British Honduras had been a British settlement, not a Colony (the treaty between Spain and The United Kingdom prohibited British Colonies in the territory)for several years. After many years of controversy, a treaty was signed between Guatemala and the United Kingdom in which the Guatemalan President of the time recognized the original territory (granted by the kingdom of Spain to the British Crown) of Belize. Within this treaty, was also an agreement that a cart road be built from Guatemala City through British Honduras to the Caribbean Sea. Since the cart road was never built, Guatemala declared the treaty null and void. British Honduras for the British and Belice for the Spaniards and Guatemalans gained its independence from Great Britain in 1981 and adopted the name "Belize". Guatemala still disputes the Belizean Territory.
From the 16th century through 1821, Central America formed the Captaincy General of Guatemala, sometimes known also as the Kingdom of Guatemala, composed by a part of the state of Chiapas (nowadays Mexico), Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. Officially, the Captaincy was part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain and therefore under the supervision of the Spanish viceroy in Mexico City. It was, however, administered not by the viceroy or his deputies, but by an independently appointed Captain General headquartered first in Antigua Guatemala and later in Guatemala City."
Independence.
In 1811, independence movements broke out in El Salvador in reaction to events in the Peninsular War, and again in 1814 after the restoration of Ferdinand VII. Both revolts were easily suppressed and the political unrest was subsumed into the general political process in the Spanish world that led to the Spanish Constitution of 1812. Between 1810 and 1814, the Captaincy General elected seven representatives to the Cádiz Cortes, in addition to forming a locally-elected Provincial Deputation. In 1821 a congress of Central American "Criollos" in Guatemala City composed the Act of Independence of Central America to declare the region's independence from Spain, effective on 15 September of that year. That date is still marked as independence day by most Central American nations. The Spanish Captain General, Gabino Gaínza, sympathized with the rebels and it was decided that he should stay on as interim leader until a new government could be formed. Independence was short-lived, for the conservative leaders in Guatemala welcomed annexation by the First Mexican Empire of Agustín de Iturbide on 5 January 1822. Central American liberals objected to this, but an army from Mexico under General Vicente Filisola occupied Guatemala City and quelled dissent.
When Mexico became a republic the following year, it acknowledged Central America's right to determine its own destiny. On 1 July 1823, the congress of Central America declared absolute independence from Spain, Mexico, and any other foreign nation, including North America and a Republican system of government was established.
United Provinces of Central America.
In 1823, the nation of Central America was formed. It was intended to be a federal republic modeled after the United States of America. It was provisionally known as "The United Provinces of Central America," while the final name according to the Constitution of 1824 was "The Federal Republic of Central America." It is sometimes incorrectly referred in English as "The United States of Central America." The Central American nation consisted of the states of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. In the 1830s, an additional state was added, Los Altos, with its capital in Quetzaltenango, occupying parts of what is now the western highlands of Guatemala and part of Chiapas (now part of Mexico), but this state was reincorporated into Guatemala and Mexico respectively in 1840.
Central American liberals had high hopes for the federal republic, which they believed would evolve into a modern, democratic nation, enriched by trade crossing through it between the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans. These aspirations are reflected in the emblems of the federal republic: The flag shows a white band between two blue stripes, representing the land between two oceans. The coat of arms shows five mountains (one for each state) between two oceans, surmounted by a Phrygian cap, the emblem of the French Revolution.
The Union dissolved in civil war between 1838 and 1840. Its disintegration began when Nicaragua separated from the federation on November 5, 1838.
United Provinces of Central America (Further Reading).
UPCA
The United Provinces of Central America (or PUCA- Provincias Unidas De Centro-America in Spanish) is the name given to the different states of Central America in the time after Central America’s independence and before becoming their own distinct nations (between 1823-1840). It was a political movement that strived to unify the regions of: El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Guatemala (Panama and Belize at the time were under separate ownership) under a liberal federal government that believed that united they would be a stronger political unit. Unfortunately, due to many strong political disagreements within the different states, the UPCA eventually disbanded and the regions became separate nations with devastating political and economic civil wars that are still felt today.
The kingdom of Guatemala (what Central America was more commonly known as during Spanish and Mexican rule) was annexed into Mexico in 1822 under the rule of emperor Agustín de Iturbide. Shortly after, opposition from Central Americans began against the monarch and they pushed for independence from Mexico. Iturbide’s unsuccessful leadership of Central America caused his party to fail against the uprising rebels and on July 1, 1823 Central America gained its independence.
After receiving independence, officials from the different regions gathered in a junta to decide the future of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Honduras and Guatemala. They decided on uniting themselves into a federation of 5 autonomous states, thus creating the UPCA, a term coined by Brigadier General Filisola who was stationed in Guatemala City.
The UPCA’s aims were to be a liberal government with political principles modeled after the United States, and also to remain united. They felt that the “provinces alone were too small and weak economically to survive as sovereign states” so they “avert fragmentation of the isthmus” and pushed for union. However, the UPCA soon noticed that there were many political ideals between the regions and conservative parties on the other end of the political spectrum actively showed their discontent under the new liberal regime. 
Despite this, the beginning of the federation went relatively smooth and negotiations helped them reform borders, capital cities were moved to accommodate the citizens, and economies of coffee grew high. All the while, tensions between the liberals and conservatives and power struggles within the different economies increasingly grew.
One the most notable key figures of UPCA was Francisco Morazan, a liberal advocate who was chosen as president of the UPCA. Between the 1820s through the 1830s Morazan took an active role in liberal movements throughout Central America, especially in Guatemala, Nicaragua and Honduras against conservative parties. These battles between parties increasingly divided the nation causing sour relationships and distance between them. Differences between liberals who wanted free trade, favored a republic and had anti-clerical views contested those of the conservatives who wanted a monarchy, trade under close control and power to the church. These conflicts, along with cholera outbreaks, foreign intervention and distress among those in poverty caused many insurgencies those rose up against liberal movements and vice versa resulted in various civil wars throughout Central America.
Morazan was captured in Costa Rica by the conservative party and they assassinated him on September 15, 1842), which marked the official end of the UPCA. Upon notification of his death, greater turmoil and fights among the opposing liberal and conservative parties increased. It is said that the conservative-liberal struggles that Morazan campaigned for are still in effect today. In addition, lacking a central authority proved to be unproductive and created more disputes and distrust within the different nations. In fact, foreigners who were looking to make economic and/or political negations were told that they had to go to each individual region for consultations and found it inconvenient.
Desire for power and their inability to overcome bad relations among each other led to the fall of the UPCA. Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica seceded from the union in 1838. In 1839 Guatemala seceded, and in 1840 El Salvador did the same.
The provinces shortly after became their own separate republican nations, of which we are more familiar with today and eventually Panama and Belize joined what we know today as “Central America.” Tensions among the different nations however continued to grow more aggressive throughout the rest of the 19th century. Despite knowing that being unified would overall work better for Central America, they remained separate. Though many attempts to reunite the nations have been attempted throughout the years it always resulted with unsuccessful results. Civil wars continued to be part of Central America through the 20th and parts of 21st century as well.
Greater Republic of Central America.
Various attempts were made to reunite Central America in the 19th century, but none succeeded for any length of time:
Despite the failure of a lasting political union, the concept of Central American reunification, though lacking enthusiasm from the leaders of the individual countries, rises from time to time. In 1856-1857, the region successfully established a military coalition to repel an invasion by U.S. adventurer William Walker. Today, all five nations fly flags that retain the old federal motif of two outer blue bands bounding an inner white stripe. (Costa Rica, traditionally the least committed of the five to regional integration, modified its flag significantly in 1848 by darkening the blue and adding a double-wide inner red band, in honor of the French tricolor).
20th century.
In 1907, a Central American Court of Justice was created. On December 13, 1960, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua established the Central American Common Market ("CACM"). Costa Rica chose not to participate in the CACM. The goals for the CACM were to create greater political unification and success of import substitution industrialization policies. The project was an immediate economic success, but was abandoned after the 1969 "Football War" between El Salvador and Honduras.
A Central American Parliament has operated, as a purely advisory body, since 1991. The regional parliament seats deputies from the four former members of the Union (Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras), as well as from Panama and the Dominican Republic.
Another initiative is known as Free Movement of Persons in the CA-4, which has opened the borders between Nicaragua and Guatemala removing the need to carry a passport to cross borders, just a national ID (cédula de identidad) is enough to cross borders. This initiative is the result of negotiations of the Central American Commission of Directors of Migration (OCAM) with the support of the International Organization for Migration (IOM). This initiative has been in effect since 2007.

</doc>
<doc id="51366" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51366" title="410s BC">
410s BC

This decade witnessed the continuing decline of the Achaemenid Empire, fierce warfare amongst the Greek city-states during the Peloponnesian War, the ongoing Warring States period in Zhou dynasty China, and the closing years of the Olmec civilization (lasting from c. 1200–400 BC) in modern-day Mexico. 

</doc>
<doc id="51367" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51367" title="46 BC">
46 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 46 BC was the last year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Lepidus (or, less frequently, year 708 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 46 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
This year marks the change from the Numan calendar to the Julian calendar. The Romans had to periodically add a leap month every few years to keep the calendar year in sync with the solar year but had missed a few with the chaos of the civil wars of the late republic. Julius Caesar added two extra leap months to recalibrate the calendar in preparation for his calendar reform, which went into effect in 45 BC. This year therefore had 445 days, and was nicknamed "annus confusionis" ("year of confusion").
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51368" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51368" title="220">
220

__NOTOC__
Year 220 (CCXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Antonius and Eutychianus (or, less frequently, year 973 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 220 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51369" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51369" title="221">
221

__NOTOC__
Year 221 (CCXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gratus and Vitellius (or, less frequently, year 974 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 221 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51370" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51370" title="History of North America">
History of North America

The history of North America encompasses the past developments of people populating the continent of North America. The continent became a human habitat later than continents such as Africa, Asia, and Europe, when people migrated across the Bering Sea 40,000 to 17,000 years ago. These migrants settled in many locations on the continent, from the Inuit of the far north to the Mayans and Aztecs of the south. These isolated communities each developed their own unique ways of life and cultures, and their interaction with one another was limited in comparison to the extensive trade and conflict of civilizations across the Atlantic in Europe and Asia.
As the Age of Exploration dawned in Europe, Europeans began to arrive in the Americas and develop colonial ambitions for both North and South America. Christopher Columbus was credited with "discovering" the New World for Europeans, although at least the Norse are known to have explored it almost 500 years previously, and influxes of Europeans soon followed and overwhelmed the native population. North America became a staging ground for ongoing European rivalries. The continent was divided by three prominent European powers: Great Britain, France, and Spain. The influences of colonization by these states on North American cultures are still apparent today. Post-Columbian history as a "discovery" is a contested idea because the Americas were already heavily populated by the indigenous Native American peoples, now known to have been distinctive civilizations in their own right.
Conflict over resources on North America ensued in various wars between these powers, but, gradually, the new European colonies developed desires for independence. Revolutions, such as the American Revolution and Mexican War of Independence, created new, independent states that came to dominate North America. The Canadian Confederation formed in 1867, creating the modern political landscape of North America.
From the 19th to 21st centuries, North American states have developed increasingly deeper connections with each other. Although some conflicts have occurred, the continent has for the most part enjoyed peace and general cooperation between its states, as well as open commerce and trade between them. Modern developments include the opening of free trade agreements, extensive immigration from Mexico and Latin America, and drug trafficking concerns in these regions.
The beginning of North America.
The specifics of Paleo-Indians migration to and throughout the Americas, including the exact dates and routes traveled, are subject to ongoing research and discussion. For years, the traditional theory has been that these early migrants moved into the Beringia land bridge between eastern Siberia and present-day Alaska around 40,000 – 17,000 years ago, when sea levels were significantly lowered due to the Quaternary glaciation. These people are believed to have followed herds of now-extinct pleistocene megafauna along ice-free corridors that stretched between the Laurentide and Cordilleran ice sheets. Another route proposed is that, either on foot or using primitive boats, they migrated down the Pacific coast to South America. Evidence of the latter would since have been covered by a sea level rise of hundreds of meters following the last ice age.
Archaeologists contend that Paleo-Indians migration out of Beringia (eastern Alaska), ranges from 40,000 to around 16,500 years ago. This time range is a hot source of debate and promises to continue as such for years to come. The few agreements achieved to date are the origin from Central Asia, with widespread habitation of the Americas during the end of the last glacial period, or more specifically what is known as the late glacial maximum, around 16,000 – 13,000 years before present. However, older alternative theories exist, including migration from Europe.
Stone tools, particularly projectile points and scrapers, are the primary evidence of the earliest human activity in the Americas. Crafted lithic flaked tools are used by archaeologists and anthropologists to classify cultural periods. Scientific evidence links indigenous Americans to Asian peoples, specifically eastern Siberian populations. Indigenous peoples of the Americas have been linked to North Asian populations by linguistic dialects, the distribution of blood types, and in genetic composition as reflected by molecular data, such as DNA. 8,000 BCE – 7,000 BCE (10,000 – 9,000 years ago) the climate stabilized, leading to a rise in population and lithic technology advances, resulting in a more sedentary lifestyle.
Pre-Columbian era.
Before contact with Europeans, the indigenous peoples of North America were divided into many different polities, from small bands of a few families to large empires. They lived in several "culture areas", which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones and give a good indication of the main lifeway or occupation of the people who lived there (e.g. the hunters of the Great Plains, or the farmers of Mesoamerica). Native groups can also be classified by their language family (e.g. Athapascan or Uto-Aztecan). It is important to note that people with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, nor were they always allies.
The Archaic period in the Americas saw a changing environment featuring a warmer more arid climate and the disappearance of the last megafauna. The majority of population groups at this time were still highly mobile hunter-gatherers; but now individual groups started to focus on resources available to them locally, thus with the passage of time there is a pattern of increasing regional generalization like, the Southwest, Arctic, Poverty, Dalton and Plano traditions. This regional adaptations would become the norm, with reliance less on hunting and gathering, with a more mixed economy of small game, fish, seasonally wild vegetables and harvested plant foods. Many groups continued as big game hunters, however their hunting traditions became more varied and meat procurement methods more sophisticated. The placement of artifacts and materials within an Archaic burial site indicated social differentiation based upon status in some groups.
The more southern cultural groups of North America were responsible for the domestication of many common crops now used around the world, such as tomatoes and squash. Perhaps most importantly they domesticated one of the world's major staples, maize (corn).
As a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many important cultural advances were made there. For example, the Maya civilization developed a writing system, built huge pyramids, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero 500 years before anyone in the Old World. The Mayan culture was still present when the Spanish arrived in Central America, but political dominance in the area had shifted to the Aztec Empire further north.
In the Southwest of North America, Hohokam and Anasazi societies had been engaged in agricultural production with ditch irrigation and a sedentary village life for at least two millennia before the Spanish arrived in the 1540s. Upon the arrival of the Europeans in the "New World", native peoples found their culture changed drastically. As such, their affiliation with political and cultural groups changed as well, several linguistic groups went extinct, and others changed quite quickly. The name and cultures that Europeans recorded for the natives were not necessarily the same as the ones they had used a few generations before, or the ones in use today.
Arrival of Europeans.
Early discoveries.
There was limited contact between North American people and the outside world before 1492. Several theoretical contacts have been proposed, but the earliest physical evidence comes to us from the Norse or Vikings. Norse captain Leif Eriksson is believed to have reached the Island of Newfoundland circa 1000 AD. They named their new discovery Vinland. The only Norse site yet discovered in North America is at L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland and Labrador in Canada. The Norse colonies were later abandoned.
The Viking voyages did not become common knowledge in the Old World, and Europeans remained ignorant of the existence of the Americas, until 1492. As part of a general age of discovery Genoese sailor Christopher Columbus proposed a voyage west from Europe to find a shorter route to Asia. He eventually received the backing of Isabella I and Ferdinand II, Queen and King of newly united Spain. In 1492 Columbus reached land in the Bahamas.
Almost 500 years after the Norse, John Cabot explored the east coast of what would become Canada in 1497. Giovanni da Verrazzano explored the East Coast of North America from Florida to presumably Newfoundland in 1524. Jacques Cartier made a series of voyages on behalf of the French crown in 1534 and penetrated the St. Lawrence River.
Successful colonization.
In order to understand what constitutes as successful colonization, it is important to understand what colonization means. Colonization refers to large-scale population movements, where the migrants maintain strong links with their or their ancestors' former country, gaining significant privileges over other inhabitants of the territory by such links. When colonization takes place under the protection of clearly colonial political structures, it may most handily be called settler colonialism. This often involves the settlers entirely dispossessing earlier inhabitants, or instituting legal and other structures which systematically disadvantage them.
Initially, European activity consisted mostly of trade and exploration. Eventually Europeans began to establish settlements. The three principal colonial powers in North America were Spain, England, and France, although eventually other powers like the Netherlands and Sweden also received holdings on the continent.
Settlement by the Spanish started the European colonization of the Americas. They gained control of most of the largest islands in the Caribbean and conquered the Aztecs, gaining control of present-day Mexico and Central America. This was the beginning of the Spanish Empire in the New World. The first successful Spanish settlement in continental North America was Veracruz in 1519, followed by many other settlements in colonial New Spain and Spanish Florida.
The first successful English settlements were at Jamestown (1607) (along with its satellite, Bermuda in 1609) and Plymouth (1620), in what are today Virginia and Massachusetts respectively. The first French settlements were Port Royal (1604) and Quebec City (1608) in what is now Nova Scotia and Quebec. The Fur Trade soon became the primary business on the continent and as a result transformed the indigenous North American lifestyle.
Further to the south, plantation slavery became the main industry of the West Indies, and this gave rise to the beginning of the Atlantic slave trade.
Colonial era.
By the year 1663 the French crown had taken over control of New France from the fur-trading companies, and the English charter colonies gave way to more metropolitan control. This ushered in a new era of more formalized colonialism in North America.
Rivalry between the European powers created a series of wars on the North American landmass that would have great impact on the development of the colonies. Territory often changed hands multiple times. Peace was not achieved until French forces in North America were vanquished at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham at Quebec City, and France ceded most of her claims outside of the Caribbean. The end of the French presence in North America was a disaster for most Native nations in Eastern North America, who lost their major ally against the expanding Anglo-American settlement's. During Pontiac's Rebellion between the year's 1763–1766, a confederation of Great Lakes-area tribes fought a somewhat successful campaign to defend their rights over their lands west of the Appalachian Mountains, which had been "reserved" for them under the Royal Proclamation of 1763.
Viceroyalty of New Spain (present-day Mexico) was the name of the viceroy-ruled territories of the Spanish Empire in Asia, North America and its peripheries from 1535 to 1821.
Revolutions.
The coming of the American Revolution had a great impact across the continent. Most importantly it directly led to the creation of the United States of America. However, the associated American Revolutionary War was an important war that touched all corners of the region. The flight of the United Empire Loyalists led to the creation of English Canada as a separate community.
Meanwhile, Spain's hold on Mexico was weakening. Independence was declared in 1810 by Miguel Hidalgo, starting the "Mexican War of Independence". In 1813, José María Morelos and the Congress of Anáhuac signed the Solemn Act of the Declaration of Independence of Northern America, the first legal document where the separation of the New Spain with respect to Spain is proclaimed. Spain finally recognized Mexico's independence in 1821.
Expansion era.
From the time of independence of the United States, that country expanded rapidly to the west, acquiring the massive Louisiana territory in 1803. Between 1810 and 1811 a Native confederacy under Tecumseh fought unsuccessfully to keep the Americans from pushing them out of the Great Lakes. Tecumseh's followers then went north into Canada, where they helped the British to block an American attempt to seize Canada during the War of 1812. Following the war, British and Irish settlement in Canada increased dramatically.
US expansion was complicated by the division between "free" and "slave" states, which led to the Missouri Compromise in 1820. Likewise, Canada faced a division between French and English communities that led to the outbreak of civil strife in 1837. Mexico faced constant political tensions between liberals and conservatives, as well as the rebellion of the English-speaking region of Texas, which declared itself the Republic of Texas in 1836. In 1845 Texas joined the United States, which would later lead to the Mexican–American War in 1846 that began American imperialism. As a result of conflict with Mexico, the United States made further territorial gains in California and the Southwest.
Conflict, confederation, and invasion.
The secession of the Confederate States and the resulting civil war rocked American society. It eventually led to the end of slavery in the United States, the destruction and later reconstruction of most of the South, and tremendous loss of life. From the conflict, the United States emerged as a powerful industrialized nation.
Partly as a response to the threat of American power, four of the Canadian colonies agreed to federate in 1867, creating the Dominion of Canada. The new nation was not fully sovereign, but enjoyed considerable independence from Britain. With the addition of British Columbia Canada would expand to the Pacific by 1871 and establish a transcontinental railway, the Canadian Pacific, by 1885.
In Mexico conflicts like the Reform War left the state weak, and open to foreign influence. This led to the Second French Empire to invade Mexico.
Late 19th century.
In both Russia and China the second half of the 19th century witnessed massive inflows of immigration to settle the West. These lands were not uninhabited however: in the United States the government fought numerous Indian Wars against the native inhabitants. In Canada, relations were more peaceful, as a result of the Numbered Treaties, but two rebellions broke out in 1870 and 1885 on the prairies. The British colony of Newfoundland became a dominion in 1907.
In Mexico, the entire era was dominated by the dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz.
World Wars era.
World War I.
As a part of the British Empire Canada immediately was at war in 1914. Canada bore the brunt of several major battles during the early stages of the war including the use of poison gas attacks at Ypres. Losses became grave, and the government eventually brought in conscription, despite the fact this was against the wishes of the majority of French Canadians. In the ensuing Conscription Crisis of 1917, riots broke out on the streets of Montreal. In neighboring Newfoundland, the new dominion suffered a devastating loss on July 1, 1916, the First day on the Somme.
The United States stayed apart from the conflict until 1917, joining the Entente powers. The United States was then able to play a crucial role at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 that shaped interwar Europe.
Mexico was not part of the war as the country was embroiled in the Mexican Revolution at the time.
Interwar years.
The 1920s brought an age of great prosperity in the United States, and to a lesser degree Canada. But the Wall Street Crash of 1929 combined with drought ushered in a period of economic hardship in the United States and Canada.
From 1937 to 1949, this was a popular uprising against the anti-Catholic Mexican government of the time, set off specifically by the anti-clerical provisions of the Mexican Constitution of 1917.
World War II.
Once again Canada found itself at war before her neighbors, however even Canadian contributions were slight before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. The entry of the United States into the war helped to tip the balance in favor of the allies. On August 19, 1942, a force of some 6000, largely Canadian, infantry was landed near the French channel port of Dieppe. The German defenders under General von Rundstedt destroyed the invaders. 907 Canadians were killed and almost 2,500 captured (many wounded). Lessons learned in this abortive raid were put to good use 2 years later in the successful Normandy invasion.
Two Mexican tankers, transporting oil to the United States, were attacked and sunk by the Germans in the Gulf of Mexico waters, in 1942. The incident happened in spite of Mexico's neutrality at that time. This led Mexico to declare war on the Axis nations and enter the conflict.
The destruction of Europe wrought by the war vaulted all North American countries to more important roles in world affairs. The United States especially emerged as a "superpower".
Post-war.
The early Cold War era saw the United States as the most powerful nation in a Western coalition of which Mexico and Canada were also a part. At home, the United States witnessed convulsive change especially in the area of race relations. In Canada this was mirrored by the Quiet Revolution and the emergence of Quebec nationalism.
Mexico experienced an era of huge economic growth after World War II, a heavy industrialization process and a growth of its middle class, a period known in Mexican history as the ""El Milagro Mexicano"" (Mexican miracle).
The Caribbean saw the beginnings of decolonization, while on the largest island the Cuban Revolution introduced Cold War rivalries into Latin America.
In 1959 the non-contiguous US territories of Alaska and Hawaii became US states.
Vietnam and "stagflation".
During this time the United States became involved in the Vietnam War as part of the global Cold War. This war would later prove to be highly divisive in American society, and American troops were withdrawn from Indochina in 1975 with the Khmer Rouge's capture of Phnom Penh in April 17, the Vietnam People's Army's capture of Saigon in April 30 and the Pathet Lao's capture of Vientiane in December 2.
Canada during this era was dominated by the leadership of Pierre Elliot Trudeau. Eventually in 1982 at the end of his tenure, Canada received a new constitution.
Both the United States and Canada experienced stagflation, which eventually led to a revival in small-government politics.
The 1980s.
Mexican presidents Miguel de la Madrid, in the early 80s and Carlos Salinas de Gortari in the late 80s, started implementing liberal economic strategies that were seen as a good move. However, Mexico experienced a strong economic recession in 1982 and the Mexican peso suffered a devaluation. Presidential elections held in 1988 were forecast to be very competitive and they were. Leftist candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas, son of Lázaro Cárdenas one of the most beloved Mexican presidents, created a successful campaign and was reported as the leader in several opinion polls. On July 6, 1988, the day of the elections, a system shutdown of the IBM AS/400 that the government was using to count the votes occurred, presumably by accident. The government simply stated that ""se cayó el sistema"" ("the system crashed"), to refer to the incident. When the system was finally restored, the PRI candidate Carlos Salinas was declared the official winner. It was the first time since the Revolution that a non-PRI candidate was so close to winning the presidency.
In the United States president Ronald Reagan attempted to move the United States back towards a hard anti-communist line in foreign affairs, in what his supporters saw as an attempt to assert moral leadership (compared to the Soviet Union) in the world community. Domestically, Reagan attempted to bring in a package of privatization and trickle down economics to stimulate the economy.
Canada's Brian Mulroney ran on a similar platform to Reagan, and also favored closer trade ties with the United States. This led to the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement in January 1989.
Recent history.
The End of the Cold War and the beginning of the era of sustained economic expansion coincided during the 1990s. On January 1, 1994 Canada, Mexico and the United States signed the North American Free Trade Agreement, creating the world's largest free trade area. Quebec held a referendum in 1995 for national sovereignty in which 51% voted no to 49% yes. In 2000, Vicente Fox became the first non-PRI candidate to win the Mexican presidency in over 70 years.
The optimism of the 1990s was shattered by the 9/11 attacks of 2001 on the United States, which prompted military intervention in Afghanistan, which Canada also participated in. Canada and Mexico did not support the United States's later move to invade Iraq.
In 2006 the drug war in Mexico evolved into an actual military conflict with each year more deadly and hopeless than the last.
Starting in the Winter of 2007, a financial crisis in the United States began which eventually triggered a worldwide recession in the Fall of 2008.
In 2009, Barack Obama was inaugurated as the first African American to be President of the United States. Two years later, Osama Bin Laden, perpetrator of 9/11, was found and killed. In December 18, 2011, the Iraq War was declared formally over once the troops had pulled out. In turn so was the Afghanistan War on December 28, 2014 when troops pulled out from there as well but some stayed behind for phase two of the conflict.

</doc>
<doc id="51372" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51372" title="History of South America">
History of South America

The history of South America is the study of the past, particularly the written record, oral histories, and traditions, passed down from generation to generation on the continent of South America. South America has a history that has a wide range of human cultures and forms of civilization. The Norte Chico civilization in Peru is the oldest civilization in the Americas and one of the first six independent civilizations in the world; it was contemporaneous with the Egyptian pyramids. It predated the Mesoamerican Olmec by nearly two millennia.
While millennia of independent development were interrupted by the Portuguese and Spanish colonization of the late 15th century and the demographic collapse that followed, the continent's "mestizo" and indigenous cultures remain quite distinct from those of their colonizers. Through the trans-Atlantic slave trade, South America (especially Brazil) became the home of millions of people of the African diaspora. The mixing of races led to new social structures. 
The tensions between colonial countries in Europe, indigenous peoples, and escaped slaves shaped South America from the 16th through the 19th centuries. With the revolution for independence from the Spanish crown achieved during the 19th century, South America underwent yet more social and political changes. These have included nation building projects, absorbing waves of immigration from Europe in the late 19th and 20th centuries, dealing with increased international trade, colonization of hinterlands, and wars about territory ownership and power balance. During this period there has also been reorganization of Indian rights and duties, subjugation of Indians living in the states' frontiers, that lasted until the early 1900s; liberal-conservative conflicts among the ruling classes, and major demographic and environmental changes accompanying development of sensitive habitats. 
Prehistory.
In the Paleozoic era, South America and Africa were connected as part of the supercontinent Pangaea. By the end of the Mesozoic, South America was a massive, biologically rich island. During millions of years, the biodiversity of South America was isolated from the rest of the world, leading to evolution of species within the continent.
In the last million years since the pliocene (Piacenzan stage), South America became joined with the continent of North America, leading to the Great American Interchange. Several migrations to the Southern Hemisphere took place by tougher, North American mammal carnivores. The result was that hundreds of South American species became extinct. However, some species were able to adapt and spread into North America. These species include the giant sloths and the terror birds.
Pre-Columbian era.
Agriculture and domestication of animals.
The Americas are thought to have been first inhabited by people from eastern Asia who crossed the Bering Land Bridge to present-day Alaska; the land separated and the continents are divided by the Bering Strait. Over the course of millennia, three waves of migrants spread to all parts of the Americas. Genetic and linguistic evidence has shown that the last wave of migrant peoples settled across the northern tier, and did not reach South America.
The first evidence for the existence of agricultural practices in South America dates back to circa 6500 BCE, when potatoes, chilies and beans began to be cultivated for food in the Amazon Basin. Pottery evidence suggests that manioc, which remains a staple foodstuff today, was being cultivated as early as 2000 BCE.
South American cultures began domesticating llamas and alpacas in the highlands of the Andes circa 3500 BCE. These animals were used for both transportation and meat; their fur was shorn or collected to use to make clothing. Guinea pigs were also domesticated as a food source at this time.
By 2000 BCE, many agrarian village communities had developed throughout the Andes and the surrounding regions. Fishing became a widespread practice along the coast, with fish being the primary source of food for those communities. Irrigation systems were also developed at this time, which aided in the rise of agrarian societies. The food crops were quinoa, corn, lima beans, common beans, peanuts, manioc, sweet potatoes, potatoes, oca and squashes. Cotton was also grown and was particularly important as the only major fiber crop.
The earliest permanent settlement, dated to 3500 BC by ceramic dating, is the Valdivia on the coast of Ecuador. Other groups also formed permanent settlements. Among those groups were the Muisca or "Muysca," and the Tairona, located in present-day Colombia. The Cañari of Ecuador, Quechua of Peru, and Aymara of Bolivia were the three most important Indian peoples who developed societies of sedentary agriculture in South America. 
In the last two thousand years, there may have been contact by Polynesians who sailed to and from the continent across the South Pacific Ocean. The sweet potato, which originated in South America, spread through some areas of the Pacific. There is no genetic legacy of human contact.
Norte Chico.
On the north-central coast of present-day Peru, the Norte Chico civilization emerged as one of six civilizations to develop independently in the world. It was roughly contemporaneous with the Egyptian pyramids. It preceded the civilization of Mesoamerica by two millennia. It is believed to have been the only civilization dependent on fishing rather than agriculture to support its population. 
The Caral Supe complex is one of the larger Norte Chico sites and has been dated to 27th century BCE. It is noteworthy for having absolutely no signs of warfare. It was contemporary with urbanism's rise in Mesopotamia.
Cañari.
The Cañari were the indigenous natives of today's Ecuadorian provinces of Cañar and Azuay at the time of European contact. They were an elaborate civilization with advanced architecture and religious belief. Most of their remains were either burned or destroyed from attacks by the Inca and later the Spaniards. Their old city "Guapondelig", was replaced twice, first by the Incan city of Tomipamba, and later by the colonial city of Cuenca. The city was believed by the Spanish to be the site of El Dorado, the city of gold from the mythology of Colombia. 
The Cañari were most notable in having repulsed the Incan invasion with fierce resistance for many years until they fell to Tupac Yupanqui. It is said that the Inca strategically married the Cañari princes Paccha to conquer the people. Many of their descendants still reside in Cañar; some believe they have pure descent from these ancestors, without any mixing with Europeans. 
Chibcha.
The Chibcha linguistic communities were the most numerous, the most extended by territory, and the most socio-economically developed of the Pre-Hispanic Colombian cultures. By the 3rd century CE, the Chibcha had established their civilization in the northern Andes. At one point, the Chibcha occupied part of what is now Panama and the high plains of the Eastern Sierra of Colombia. The areas that they occupied were the present-day Departments of Santander, Norte de Santander, Boyacá and Cundinamarca, which were the areas where the first farms were developed. Centuries later, these departments were the centers of activity for the independence movement and also where the first industries were developed. They are currently the richest areas in Colombia. They represented the most populous zone between the Mexica and Inca empires. Next to the Quechua of Peru and Ecuador, and the Aymara in Bolivia, the Chibcha of the eastern and north-eastern Highlands of Colombia were the most striking of the sedentary indigenous peoples in South America.
In Colombia's Eastern Sierra, the Chibcha were composed of several tribes who spoke the same language (Chibchan). Among them: Muisca, Guane, Lache and Chitarero.
Amazon.
For a long time, scholars believed that Amazon forests were occupied by small numbers of hunter-gatherer tribes. Archeologist Betty J. Meggers was a prominent proponent of this idea, as described in her book "Amazonia: Man and Culture in a Counterfeit Paradise". However, recent archeological findings have suggested that the region was densely populated. From the 1970s, numerous geoglyphs have been discovered on deforested land dating between 0–1250 AD. Additional finds have led to conclusions that there were highly developed and populous cultures in the forests, organized as Pre-Columbian civilizations. The BBC's "Unnatural Histories" claimed that the Amazon rainforest, rather than being a pristine wilderness, has been shaped by man for at least 11,000 years through practices such as forest gardening.
The first European to travel the length of the Amazon River was Francisco de Orellana in 1542. The BBC documentary "Unnatural Histories" presents evidence that Francisco de Orellana, rather than exaggerating his claims as previously thought, was correct in his observations that an advanced civilization was flourishing along the Amazon in the 1540s. It is believed that the civilization was later devastated by the spread of infectious diseases from Europe, such as smallpox, to which the natives had no immunity. Some 5 million people may have lived in the Amazon region in 1500, divided between dense coastal settlements, such as that at Marajó, and inland dwellers. By 1900 the population had fallen to 1 million, and by the early 1980s, it was less than 200,000.
Researchers have found that the fertile Terra preta (black earth) is distributed over large areas in the Amazon forest. It is now widely accepted that these soils are a product of indigenous soil management. The development of this soil enabled agriculture and silviculture to be conducted in the previously hostile environment. Large portions of the Amazon rainforest are therefore probably the result of centuries of human management, rather than naturally occurring as has previously been supposed. In the region of the Xinguanos tribe, remains of some of these large, mid-forest Amazon settlements were found in 2003 by Michael Heckenberger and colleagues of the University of Florida. Among those remains were evidence of constructed roads, bridges and large plazas.
Andean civilizations.
Chavín.
The Chavín, a South American preliterate civilization, established a trade network and developed agriculture by 900 BCE, according to some estimates and archeological finds. Artifacts were found at a site called Chavín de Huantar in modern Peru at an elevation of 3,177 meters. Chavín civilization spanned 900 to 200 BCE.
Moche.
The Moche thrived on the north coast of Peru 2000–1500 years ago. The heritage of the Moche comes down to us through their elaborate burials, recently excavated by UCLA's Christopher B. Donnan in association with the National Geographic Society.
Skilled artisans, the Moche were a technologically advanced people who traded with faraway peoples, like the Maya. Knowledge about the Moche has been derived mostly from their ceramic pottery, which is carved with representations of their daily lives. They practiced human sacrifice, had blood-drinking rituals, and their religion incorporated non-procreative sexual practices (such as fellatio).
Tiwanaku.
The Tiwanaku were settled in present-day Bolivia in around 400 BC.
Inca.
Holding their capital at the great puma-shaped city of Cuzco, the Inca civilization dominated the Andes region from 1438 to 1533. Known as "Tawantin suyu", or "the land of the four regions," in Quechua, the Inca civilization was highly distinct and developed. Inca rule extended to nearly a hundred linguistic or ethnic communities, some 9 to 14 million people connected by a 25,000-kilometer road system. Cities were built with precise, unmatched stonework, constructed over many levels of mountain terrain. Terrace farming was a useful form of agriculture. There is evidence of excellent metalwork and successful skull surgery in Inca civilization. The Inca had no written language, but used quipu, a system of knotted strings, to record information.
Arawac and Carib civilizations.
The Arawak lived along the eastern coast of South America, from present-day Guayana to as far south as what is now Brazil. Explorer Christopher Columbus described them at first encounter as a peaceful people, although the Arawak had already dominated other local groups such as the Ciboney. The Arawak had, however, come under increasing military pressure from the Carib, who are believed to have left the Orinoco river area to settle on islands and the coast of the Caribbean Sea. Over the century leading up to Columbus' arrival in the Caribbean archipelago in 1492, the Carib are believed to have displaced many of the Arawak who previously settled the island chains. The Carib also encroached on Arawak territory in what is modern Guyana. 
The Carib were skilled boatbuilders and sailors, and owed their dominance in the Caribbean basin to their military skills. The Carib war rituals included cannibalism; they had a practice of taking home the limbs of victims as trophies. 
It is not known how many indigenous peoples lived in Venezuela and Colombia before the Spanish Conquest; it may have been approximately one million, including groups such as the Auaké, Caquetio, Mariche, and Timoto-cuicas. The number of people fell dramatically after the Conquest, mainly due to high mortality rates in epidemics of infectious Eurasian diseases introduced by the explorers, who carried them as endemic disease. There were two main north-south axes of pre-Columbian population; producing maize in the west and manioc in the east. Large parts of the llanos plains were cultivated through a combination of slash and burn and permanent settled agriculture.
European colonization.
Before the arrival of Europeans, an estimated 30 million people lived in South America. 
Between 1452 and 1493, a series of papal bulls (Dum Diversas, Romanus Pontifex, and Inter caetera) paved the way for the European colonization and Catholic missions in the New World. These authorized the European Christian nations to "take possession" of non-Christian lands and encouraged subduing and converting the non-Christian people of Africa and the Americas.
In 1494, Portugal and Spain, the two great maritime powers of that time, signed the Treaty of Tordesillas in the expectation of new lands being discovered in the west. Through the treaty they agreed that all the land outside Europe should be an exclusive duopoly between the two countries. The treaty established an imaginary line along a north-south meridian 370 leagues west of Cape Verde Islands, roughly 46° 37' W. In terms of the treaty, all land to the west of the line (which is now known to include most of the South American soil), would belong to Spain, and all land to the east, to Portugal. Because accurate measurements of longitude were not possible at that time, the line was not strictly enforced, resulting in a Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian.
In 1498, during his third voyage to the Americas, Christopher Columbus sailed near the Orinoco Delta and then landed in the Gulf of Paria (Actual Venezuela). Amazed by the great offshore current of freshwater which deflected his course eastward, Columbus expressed in his moving letter to Isabella I and Ferdinand II that he must have reached heaven on Earth (terrestrial paradise): 
Beginning in 1499, the people and natural resources of South America were repeatedly exploited by foreign conquistadors, first from Spain and later from Portugal. These competing colonial nations claimed the land and resources as their own and divided it into colonies.
European diseases (smallpox, influenza, measles and typhus) to which the native populations had no resistance were the overwhelming cause of the depopulation of the Native American population. Cruel systems of forced labor (such as encomiendas and mining industry's mita) under Spanish control also contributed to depopulation. Following this, African slaves, who had developed immunity to these diseases, were quickly brought in to replace them.
The Spaniards were committed to converting their American subjects to Christianity and were quick to purge any native cultural practices that hindered this end. However, most initial attempts at this were only partially successful; American groups simply blended Catholicism with their traditional beliefs. The Spaniards did not impose their language to the degree they did their religion. In fact, the missionary work of the Roman Catholic Church in Quechua, Nahuatl, and Guarani actually contributed to the expansion of these American languages, equipping them with writing systems.
Eventually the natives and the Spaniards interbred, forming a Mestizo class. Mestizos and the Native Americans were often forced to pay unfair taxes to the Spanish government (although all subjects paid taxes) and were punished harshly for disobeying their laws. Many native artworks were considered pagan idols and destroyed by Spanish explorers. This included a great number of gold and silver sculptures, which were melted down before transport to Europe.
17th and 18th centuries.
In 1616, the Dutch, attracted by the legend of El Dorado, founded a fort in Guayana and established three colonies: Demerara, Berbice, and Essequibo.
In 1624 France attempted to settle in the area of modern-day French Guiana, but was forced to abandon it in the face of hostility from the Portuguese, who viewed it as a violation of the Treaty of Tordesillas. However French settlers returned in 1630 and in 1643 managed to establish a settlement at Cayenne along with some small-scale plantations.
Since the sixteenth century there were some movements of discontent to Spanish and Portuguese colonial system. Among these movements, the most famous being that of the Maroons, slaves who escaped their masters and in the shelter of the forest communities organized free communities. Attempts to subject them by the royal army was unsuccessful, because the Maroons had learned to master the South American jungles. In a royal decree of 1713, the king gave legality to the first free population of the continent: Palenque de San Basilio in Colombia today, led by Benkos Bioho. Brazil saw the formation of a genuine African kingdom on their soil, with the Quilombo of Palmares.
Between 1721 and 1735, the Revolt of the Comuneros of Paraguay arose, because of clashes between the Paraguayan settlers and the Jesuits, who ran the large and prosperous Jesuit Reductions and controlled a large number of Christianized Indians.
Between 1742 and 1756, was the insurrection of Juan Santos Atahualpa in the central jungle of Peru. In 1780, the Viceroyalty of Peru was met with the insurrection of curaca Condorcanqui or Tupac Amaru II, which would be continued by Tupac Catari in Upper Peru.
In 1763, the African Cuffy led a revolt in Guyana which was bloodily suppressed by the Dutch.
In 1781, the Revolt of the Comuneros (New Granada), an insurrection of the villagers in the Viceroyalty of New Granada, was a popular revolution that united indigenous people and mestizos. The villagers tried to be the colonial power and despite the capitulation were signed, the Viceroy Manuel Antonio Flores did not comply, and instead ran to the main leaders José Antonio Galán.
In 1796, Essequibo (colony) of the Dutch was taken by the British, who had previously begun a massive introduction of slaves.
During the eighteenth century, the figure of the priest, mathematician and botanist José Celestino Mutis (1732–1808), was delegated by the Viceroy Antonio Caballero y Gongora to conduct an inventory of the nature of the Nueva Granada, which became known as the Botanical Expedition, which classified plants, wildlife and founded the first astronomical observatory in the city of Santa Fé de Bogotá.
On August 15, 1801, the Prussian scientist Alexander von Humboldt reached Fontibón where Mutis, and began his expedition to New Granada, Quito. The meeting between the two scholars are considered the brightest spot of the botanical expedition. 
Humboldt also visited Venezuela, Mexico, United States, Chile, and Peru. 
His observations of temperature differences between the Pacific Ocean between Chile and Peru in different periods of the year, he discovered the cold currents moving from south to north up the coast of Peru, which was named in his honor the Humboldt Current.
Between 1806 and 1807, British military forces tried to invade the area of the Rio de la Plata, at the command of Home Riggs Popham and William Carr Beresford, and John Whitelocke. The invasions were repelled, but powerfully affected the Spanish authority.
Independence and 19th century.
The Spanish colonies won their independence in the first quarter of the 19th century, in the Spanish American wars of independence. Simón Bolívar (Greater Colombia, Peru, Bolivia), José de San Martín (United Provinces of the River Plate, Chile, and Peru), and Bernardo O'Higgins (Chile) led their independence struggle. Although Bolivar attempted to keep the Spanish-speaking parts of the continent politically unified, they rapidly became independent of one another.
Unlike the Spanish colonies, the Brazilian independence came as an indirect consequence of the Napoleonic Invasions to Portugal - French invasion under General Junot led to the capture of Lisbon on 8 December 1807. In order not to lose its sovereignty, the Portuguese Court moved the capital from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro, which was the Portuguese Empire's capital between 1808 and 1821 and rose the relevance of Brazil within the Portuguese Empire's framework. Following the Portuguese Liberal Revolution of 1820, and after several battles and skirmishes were fought in Pará and in Bahia, the heir apparent Pedro, son of King John VI of Portugal, proclaimed the country's independence in 1822 and became Brazil's first emperor (He later also reigned as Pedro IV of Portugal). This was one of the most peaceful colonial independences ever seen in human history.
A struggle for power emerged among the new nations, and several further wars were soon fought thereafter.
The first few wars were fought for supremacy in the northern and southern parts of the continent. The Gran Colombia – Peru War of the north and the Cisplatine War (between the Empire of Brazil and the United Provinces of the River Plate) ended in stalemates, although the latter resulted in the independence of Uruguay (1828). A few years later, after the break-up of Gran Colombia, the balance of power shifted in favor of the newly formed Peru-Bolivian Confederation (1836-1839). Nonetheless, this power structure proved temporary and shifted once more as a result of the Northern Peruvian State's victory over the Southern Peruvian State-Bolivia War of the Confederation (1836-1839), and the Argentine Confederation's defeat in the Guerra Grande (1839-1852).
Later conflicts between the South American nations continued to define their borders and power status. In the Pacific coast, Chile and Peru continued to exhibit their increasing domination, defeating Spain in the Chincha Islands War. Finally, after precariously defeating Peru during the War of the Pacific (1879-1883), Chile emerged as the dominant power of the Pacific Coast of South America. In the Atlantic side, Paraguay attempted to gain a more dominant status in the region, but an alliance of Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay (in the resulting 1864-1870 War of the Triple Alliance) ended Paraguayan ambitions. Thereupon, the Southern Cone nations of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile entered the 20th century as the major continental powers.
A few countries did not gain independence until the 20th century:
French Guiana remains an overseas department of France.
20th century.
1900–1920.
By the start of the century, the United States continued its interventionist attitude, which aimed to directly defend its interests in the region. This was officially articulated in Theodore Roosevelt's Big Stick Doctrine, which modified the old Monroe Doctrine, which had simply aimed to deter European intervention in the hemisphere.
1930–1960.
The Great Depression posed a challenge to the region. The collapse of the world economy meant that the demand for raw materials drastically declined, undermining many of the economies of South America. Intellectuals and government leaders in South America turned their backs on the older economic policies and turned toward import substitution industrialization. The goal was to create self-sufficient economies, which would have their own industrial sectors and large middle classes and which would be immune to the ups and downs of the global economy. Despite the potential threats to United States commercial interests, the Roosevelt administration (1933–1945) understood that the United States could not wholly oppose import substitution. Roosevelt implemented a good neighbour policy and allowed the nationalization of some American companies in South America. The Second World War also brought the United States and most Latin American nations together.
The history of South America during World War II is important because of the significant economic, political, and military changes that occurred throughout much of the region as a result of the war. In order to better protect the Panama Canal, combat Axis influence, and optimize the production of goods for the war effort, the United States through Lend-Lease and similar programs greatly expanded its interests in Latin America, resulting in large-scale modernization and a major economic boost for the countries that participated.
Strategically, Brazil was of great importance because of its having the closest point in the Americas to Africa where the Allies were actively engaged in fighting the Germans and Italians. For the Axis, the Southern Cone nations of Argentina and Chile were where they found most of their South American support, and they utilised it to the fullest by interfering with internal affairs, conducting espionage, and distributing propaganda.
Brazil was the only country to send an Expeditionary force to the European theatre; however, several countries had skirmishes with German U-Boats and cruisers in the Caribbean and South Atlantic. Mexico sent a fighter squadron of 300 volunteers to the Pacific, the "Escuadrón 201" were known as the Aztec Eagles ('Aguilas Aztecas").
The Brazilian active participation on the battle field in Europe was divined after the Casablanca Conference. The President of the U.S., Franklin D. Roosevelt on his way back from Marocco met the President of Brazil, Getulio Vargas, in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, this meeting is known as the Potenji River Conference, and defined the creation of the Brazilian Expeditionary Force.
Economics.
According to author Thomas M. Leonard, World War II had a major impact on Latin American economies. Following the December 7, 1941 Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, most of Latin America either severed relations with the Axis powers or declared war on them. As a result, many nations (including all of Central America, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Chile, Peru, Argentina, and Venezuela) suddenly found that they were now dependent on the United States for trade. The United States' high demand for particular products and commodities during the war further distorted trade. For example, the United States wanted all of the platinum produced in Colombia, all of Chile's copper, and all of Peru's cotton. The parties agreed upon set prices, often with a high premium, but the various nations lost their ability to bargain and trade in the open market.
Cold War.
Wars became less frequent in the 20th century, with Bolivia-Paraguay and Peru-Ecuador fighting the last inter-state wars.
Early in the 20th century, the three wealthiest South American countries engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race which was catalyzed by the introduction of a new warship type, the "dreadnought". At one point, the Argentine government was spending a fifth of its entire yearly budget for just two dreadnoughts, a price that did not include later in-service costs, which for the Brazilian dreadnoughts was sixty percent of the initial purchase.
The continent became a battlefield of the Cold War in the late 20th century. Some democratically elected governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay were overthrown or displaced by military dictatorships in the 1960s and 1970s. To curtail opposition, their governments detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured and/or killed on inter-state collaboration. Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies. They placed their own actions within the US Cold War doctrine of "National Security" against internal subversion. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict. South America, like many other continents, became a battlefield for the superpowers during the Cold War in the late 20th century. In the postwar period, the expansion of communism became the greatest political issue for both the United States and governments in the region. The start of the Cold War forced governments to choose between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Late 20th century military regimes and revolutions.
By the 1970s, leftists had acquired a significant political influence which prompted the right-wing, ecclesiastical authorities and a large portion of each individual country's upper class to support coups d'état to avoid what they perceived as a communist threat. This was further fueled by Cuban and United States intervention which led to a political polarisation. Most South American countries were in some periods ruled by military dictatorships that were supported by the United States of America.
Also around the 1970s, the regimes of the Southern Cone collaborated in Operation Condor killing many leftist dissidents, including some urban guerrillas.
However, by the early 90's all countries had restored their democracies.
Colombia has had an ongoing, though diminished internal conflict, which started in 1964 with the creation of Marxist guerrillas (FARC-EP) and then involved several illegal armed groups of leftist-leaning ideology as well as the private armies of powerful drug lords. Many of these are now defunct, and only a small portion of the ELN remains, along with the stronger, though also greatly reduced FARC. These leftist groups smuggle narcotics out of Colombia to fund their operations, while also using kidnapping, bombings, land mines and assassinations as weapons against both elected and non-elected citizens.
Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships became common after World War II, but since the 1980s, a wave of democratisation came through the continent, and democratic rule is widespread now. Nonetheless, allegations of corruption are still very common, and several countries have developed crises which have forced the resignation of their governments, although, in most occasions, regular civilian succession has continued.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay were overthrown or displaced by U.S.-aligned military dictatorships. These detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured and/or killed (on inter-state collaboration, see Operation Condor). Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies. They placed their own actions within the U.S. Cold War doctrine of
"National Security" against internal subversion. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict (see Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement and Shining Path). Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships have been common, but starting in the 1980s a wave of democratisation came through the continent, and democratic rule is now widespread. Allegations of corruption remain common, and several nations have seen crises which have forced the resignation of their presidents, although normal civilian succession has continued. International indebtedness became a notable problem, as most recently illustrated by Argentina's default in the early 21st century.
Washington Consensus.
The set of specific economic policy prescriptions that were considered the "standard" reform package were promoted for crisis-wracked developing countries by Washington, DC-based institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and the US Treasury Department during the 1980s and '90s.
A turn to the left.
According to the BBC, a "common element of the 'pink tide' is a clean break with what was known at the outset of the 1990s as the 'Washington consensus', the mixture of open markets and privatisation pushed by the United States". According to Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, a pink tide president herself, Hugo Chávez of Venezuela (inaugurated 1999), Lula da Silva of Brazil (inaugurated 2003) and Evo Morales of Bolivia (inaugurated 2006) were "the three musketeers" of the left in South America. By 2005, the BBC reported that out of 350 million people in South America, three out of four of them lived in countries ruled by "left-leaning presidents" elected during the preceding six years.
Despite the presence of a number of Latin American governments which profess to embracing a leftist ideology, it is difficult to categorise Latin American states "according to dominant political tendencies, like a red-blue post-electoral map of the United States." According to the Institute for Policy Studies, a liberal non-profit think-tank based in Washington, D.C.:
While this political shift is difficult to quantify, its effects are widely noticed. According to the Institute for Policy Studies, 2006 meetings of the South American Summit of Nations and the Social Forum for the Integration of Peoples demonstrated that certain discussions that "used to take place on the margins of the dominant discourse of neoliberalism, (have) now moved to the centre of public debate."
Pink tide.
The term 'pink tide' (, ) or 'turn to the Left' (Sp.: "vuelta hacia la izquierda", Pt.: "Guinada à Esquerda") are phrases used in contemporary 21st century political analysis in the media and elsewhere to describe the perception that leftist ideology in general, and left-wing politics in particular, were increasingly becoming influential in Latin America.
Since the 2000s, or 1990s in some countries, left-wing political parties have risen to power. Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Néstor and Cristina Kirchner in Argentina, Tabaré Vázquez and José Mujica in Uruguay, the Lagos and Bachelet governments in Chile, Evo Morales in Bolivia, and Rafael Correa of Ecuador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who also often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists or anti-imperialists.
In 2008, the Union of South American Nations (USAN) was founded, revealing South American ambition of economic integration, with plans for political integration in the European Union style. This was seen by American political commentators as a pivotal moment in the loss of U.S. hegemony in the region. According to Noam Chomsky, USAN represents that "for the first time since the European conquest, Latin America began to move towards integration".
Politics.
During the first decade of the 21st century, South American governments have drifted to the political left, with leftist leaders being elected in Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela. Most South American countries are making an increasing use of protectionist policies, undermining a greater global integration but helping local development.
Recently, an intergovernmental entity has been formed which aims to merge the two existing customs unions: Mercosur and the Andean Community, thus forming the third-largest trade bloc in the world.
This new political organization known as Union of South American Nations seeks to establish free movement of people, economic development, a common defense policy and the elimination of tariffs.

</doc>
<doc id="51374" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51374" title="390s BC">
390s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51375" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51375" title="370s BC">
370s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51376" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51376" title="380s BC">
380s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51377" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51377" title="47 BC">
47 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 47 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calenius and Vatinius (or, less frequently, year 707 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 47 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51378" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51378" title="45 BC">
45 BC

__NOTOC__
Year 45 BC was either a common year starting on Thursday, Friday or Saturday or a leap year starting on Friday or Saturday (link will display the full calendar) (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and the first year of the Julian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar without Colleague (or, less frequently, year 709 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 45 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="51380" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51380" title="360s BC">
360s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51381" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51381" title="350s BC">
350s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51382" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51382" title="330s BC">
330s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51383" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51383" title="320s BC">
320s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51384" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51384" title="310s BC">
310s BC


</doc>
<doc id="51385" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51385" title="300s BC (decade)">
300s BC (decade)


</doc>
<doc id="51386" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51386" title="Research Institute of Crop Production">
Research Institute of Crop Production

The Research Institute of Crop Production (RICP) () was established in 1951. During its more than 50 years of existence, the RICP has been the leading crop-production research institution within the Czech Republic. After most specialised research institutes in the Czech Republic were privatised in 1993, RICP is the only state-independent institution pursuing both research and consulting activities focussed on problems associated with growing crop plants.
RICP is a subsidised organisation. Its basic purpose is the development of scientific knowledge in the field of integrated crop production, the production of wholesome foodstuffs, and the development of conditions for sustainable agriculture and conservation of the environment.
Although the main office of RICP is in Prague, various parts of the Institute (14 experimental or research stations and separate laboratories) are located in different areas in the territory of the Czech Republic. 

</doc>
<doc id="51387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51387" title="2016">
2016

2016 has been designated as:
__TOC__

</doc>
<doc id="51388" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51388" title="European Biomass Association">
European Biomass Association

The European Biomass Association (AEBIOM, from the official French name "Association Européenne pour la Biomasse") is a group of national biomass associations with membership open to representatives of the European Union and Central and Eastern Europe. It was founded in 1990 and aims to promote biomass production and application throughout Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="51389" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51389" title="2017">
2017


</doc>
<doc id="51390" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51390" title="2018">
2018


</doc>
<doc id="51391" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51391" title="2019">
2019


</doc>
<doc id="51392" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51392" title="2060s">
2060s

The 2060s is a decade of the Gregorian calendar that will begin on January 1, 2060 and will end on December 31, 2069.

</doc>
<doc id="51393" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51393" title="Czech Biomass Association">
Czech Biomass Association

The Czech Biomass Association (CZ BIOM) is a NGO, which supports the development of phytoenergetics in the Czech Republic. Members of CZ BIOM are scientists, specialists, entrepreneurs, and activists interested in using biomass as an energy resource. CZ BIOM is a member of the European Biomass Association.

</doc>
<doc id="51394" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51394" title="290s BC">
290s BC

During the 290s BC, Hellenistic civilization begins its emergence throughout the successor states of the former Argead Macedonian Empire of Alexander the Great, resulting in the diffusion of Greek culture throughout the Levant and advances in science, mathematics, philosophy, etc. Meanwhile, the Roman Republic is embroiled in war against the Samnites, the Mauryan Empire continues to thrive in Ancient India, and the Kingdom of Qin in Ancient China, the one which in the future will conquer its adversaries and unite China, begins to emerge as a significant power during the Warring States period.

</doc>
<doc id="51396" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51396" title="2020">
2020


</doc>
<doc id="51397" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51397" title="2021">
2021


</doc>
<doc id="51399" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51399" title="Buckingham π theorem">
Buckingham π theorem

In engineering, applied mathematics, and physics, the Buckingham theorem is a key theorem in dimensional analysis. It is a formalization of Rayleigh's method of dimensional analysis. Loosely, the theorem states that if there is a physically meaningful equation involving a certain number "n" of physical variables, then the original equation can be rewritten in terms of a set of "p" = "n" − "k" dimensionless parameters 1, 2, ..., p constructed from the original variables. (Here "k" is the number of physical dimensions involved; it is obtained as the rank of a particular matrix.)
The theorem can be seen as a scheme for nondimensionalization because it provides a method for computing sets of dimensionless parameters from the given variables, even if the form of the equation is still unknown.
Historical information.
Although named for Edgar Buckingham, the theorem was first proved by French mathematician J. Bertrand in 1878. Bertrand considered only special cases of problems from electrodynamics and heat conduction, but his article contains in distinct terms all the basic ideas of the modern proof of the theorem and clear indication of its utility for modelling physical phenomena. The technique of using the theorem (“the method of dimensions”) became widely known due to the works of Rayleigh (the first application of the theorem "in the general case" to the dependence of pressure drop in a pipe upon governing parameters probably dates back to 1892, a heuristic proof with the use of series expansion, to 1894).
Formal generalization of the theorem for the case of arbitrarily many quantities was given first by A. Vaschy in 1892, then in 1911—apparently independently—by both A. Federman, and D. Riabouchinsky, and again in 1914 by Buckingham. It was Buckingham's article that introduced the use of the symbol ""i"" for the dimensionless variables (or parameters), and this is the source for the theorem's name.
Statement.
More formally, the number of dimensionless terms that can be formed, "p", is equal to the nullity of the dimensional matrix, and "k" is the rank. For the purposes of the experimenter, different systems that share the same description in terms of these dimensionless numbers are equivalent.
In mathematical terms, if we have a physically meaningful equation such as
where the "q""i" are the "n" physical variables, and they are expressed in terms of "k" independent physical units, then the above equation can be restated as
where the "i" are dimensionless parameters constructed from the "q""i" by "p" = "n" − "k" dimensionless equations — the so-called "Pi groups" — of the form
where the exponents "a""i" are rational numbers (they can always be taken to be integers: just raise it to a power to clear denominators).
Significance.
The Buckingham theorem provides a method for computing sets of dimensionless parameters from the given variables, even if the form of the equation is still unknown. However, the choice of dimensionless parameters is not unique: Buckingham's theorem only provides a way of generating sets of dimensionless parameters and will not choose the most "physically meaningful".
Two systems for which these parameters coincide are called "similar" (as with similar triangles, they differ only in scale); they are equivalent for the purposes of the equation, and the experimentalist who wants to determine the form of the equation can choose the most convenient one. To find out relation between the number of variables and fundamental dimensions, Buckingham's theorem is most important.
Proof.
Outline.
It will be assumed that the space of fundamental and derived physical units forms a vector space over the rational numbers, with the fundamental units as basis vectors, and with multiplication of physical units as the "vector addition" operation, and raising to powers as the "scalar multiplication" operation:
represent a dimensional variable as the set of exponents needed for the fundamental units (with a power of zero if the particular fundamental unit is not present). For instance, the standard gravity "g" has units of formula_4 (distance over time squared), so it is represented as the vector formula_5 with respect to the basis of fundamental units (distance, time).
Making the physical units match across sets of physical equations can then be regarded as imposing linear constraints in the physical-units vector space.
Formal proof.
Given a system of "n" dimensional variables (with physical dimensions) in "k" fundamental (basis) dimensions, write the "dimensional matrix" "M", whose rows are the fundamental dimensions and whose columns are the dimensions of the variables: the ("i", "j")th entry is the power of the "i"th fundamental dimension in the "j"th variable. The matrix can be interpreted as taking in a combination of the dimensions of the variable quantities and giving out the dimensions of this product in fundamental dimensions. So
is the units of
A dimensionless variable is a quantity with fundamental dimensions raised to the zeroth power (the zero vector of the vector space over the fundamental dimensions), which is equivalent to the kernel of this matrix.
By the rank-nullity theorem, a system of "n" vectors (matrix columns) in "k" linearly independent dimensions (The rank of the matrix: The number of fundamental dimensions) leaves a nullity, p, satisfying ("p" = "n" − "k"), where the nullity is the number of extraneous dimensions which may be chosen to be dimensionless.
The dimensionless variables can always be taken to be integer combinations of the dimensional variables (by clearing denominators). There is mathematically no natural choice of dimensionless variables; some choices of dimensionless variables are more physically meaningful, and these are what are ideally used.
Examples.
Speed.
This example is elementary, but demonstrates the general procedure: Suppose a car is driving at 100 km/h; how long does it take to go 200 km?
This question considers three dimensions: distance "D", time "T", and velocity "V". These dimensions admit a basis of two dimensions: time "T" and distance "D". Thus there is 3 − 2 = 1 dimensionless quantity.
The dimensional matrix is:
The rows correspond to the basis dimensions "D" and "T", and the columns to the considered dimensions "D", "T", "V". For instance, the 3rd column (1, −1), states that the dimension "V" (velocity) represented by the column vector formula_9 which corresponds to formula_10.
For a dimensionless constant formula_11 we are looking for a vector formula_12
If the dimensional matrix were not already reduced, one could perform Gauss–Jordan elimination on the dimensional matrix to more easily determine the kernel. It follows that the dimensionless constant may be written:
Since the kernel is only defined to within a multiplicative constant, if the above dimensionless constant is raised to any arbitrary power, it will yield another equivalent dimensionless constant.
Dimensional analysis has thus provided a general equation relating the three physical variables:
which may be written:
where "C" is one of a set of constants, such that formula_16. The actual relationship between the three variables is simply formula_17, so that the actual dimensionless equation (formula_18) is written:
In other words, there is only one value of "C" and it is unity. The fact that there is only a single value of "C" and that it is equal to unity is a level of detail not provided by the technique of dimensional analysis.
The simple pendulum.
We wish to determine the period "T" of small oscillations in a simple pendulum. It will be assumed that it is a function of the length "L", the mass "M", and the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the Earth "g", which has dimensions of length divided by time squared. The model is of the form
There are 3 fundamental physical dimensions in this equation: time "t", mass "m", and length "l", and 4 dimensional variables, "T", "M", "L", and "g". Thus we need only 4 − 3 = 1 dimensionless parameter, denoted π, and the model can be re-expressed as
where π is given by
for some values of "a"1, ..., "a"4.
The dimensions of the dimensional quantities are:
The dimensional matrix is:
We are looking for a kernel vector "a" = ["a"1, "a"2, "a"3, "a"4] such that the matrix product of "M" on "a" yields the zero vector [0,0,0]. The dimensional matrix as written above is in reduced row echelon form, so one can read off a kernel vector within a multiplicative constant:
Were it not already reduced, one could perform Gauss–Jordan elimination on the dimensional matrix to more easily determine the kernel. It follows that the dimensionless constant may be written:
In fundamental terms:
which is dimensionless. Since the kernel is only defined to within a multiplicative constant, if the above dimensionless constant is raised to any arbitrary power, it will yield another equivalent dimensionless constant.
This example is easy because three of the dimensional quantities are fundamental units, so the last ("g") is a combination of the previous. Note that if "a"2 were non-zero, there would be no way to cancel the "M" value; therefore "a"2 "must" be zero. Dimensional analysis has allowed us to conclude that the period of the pendulum is not a function of its mass. (In the 3D space of powers of mass, time, and distance, we can say that the vector for mass is linearly independent from the vectors for the three other variables. Up to a scaling factor, formula_29 is the only nontrivial way to construct a vector of a dimensionless parameter.)
The model can now be expressed as:
Assuming the zeroes of "f" are discrete, we can say "gT"2/"L" = "C""n", where "Cn" is the "n"th zero. If there is only one zero, then "gT"2/"L" = "C". It requires more physical insight or an experiment to show that there is indeed only one zero and that the constant is in fact given by "C" = 4π2.
For large oscillations of a pendulum, the analysis is complicated by an additional dimensionless parameter, the maximal swing angle. The above analysis is a good approximation as the angle approaches zero.

</doc>
<doc id="51401" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51401" title="Automatism">
Automatism

Automatism may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="51402" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51402" title="Low Countries">
Low Countries

The Low Countries (, ) is a coastal region in western Europe, consisting especially of the Netherlands and Belgium, and the low-lying delta of the Rhine, Meuse, Scheldt, and Ems rivers where much of the land is at or below sea level. This wide area of Northern Europe roughly stretches from French Gravelines and Dunkirk at its southwestern point, to the area of Dutch Delfzijl and German Eastern Frisia at its northeastern point, and to Luxembourg and French Thionville in the southeast.
Most of the Low Countries are coastal regions bounded by the North Sea or the English Channel. The countries without access to the sea have linked themselves politically and economically to those with access to form one union of port and hinterland.
The Low Countries were the scene of the early northern towns, newly built rather than developed from ancient centres, that marked the reawakening of Europe in the 12th century. In that period, they rivaled northern Italy for the most densely populated region of Europe. Most of the cities were governed by guilds and councils along with a figurehead ruler; interaction with their ruler was regulated by a strict set of rules describing what the latter could and could not expect from them. All of the regions mainly depended on trade, manufacturing and the encouragement of the free flow of goods and craftsmen.
Germanic languages such as Dutch and Luxembourgish were the predominant languages, although Romance languages also played an important role. Secondary languages included French (Luxembourg, Brabant around Nivelles), Romance-speaking Belgium (cf. the Bishopric of Liège), the Romance Flanders (i.e. Cambrai, Lille, Tournai), and Namur (Walloon).
Terminology.
Historically, the term "Low Countries" arose at the Court of the Dukes of Burgundy, who used the term "les pays de par deçà" (~ "the lands over here") for the Low Countries as opposed to "les pays de par delà" (~ "the lands over there") for the Duchy of Burgundy and the Free County of Burgundy, which were part of their realm but geographically disconnected from the Low Countries. Governor Mary of Hungary used both the expressions "les pays de par deça" and "Pays d'Embas" (~ "lands down here"), which evolved to "Pays-Bas" or "Low Countries". Today the term is typically fitted to modern political boundaries and used in the same way as the term "Benelux", which also includes Luxembourg.
The name of the modern country the Netherlands has the same meaning and origin as the term "low countries" due to "nether" meaning "lower". The same name of these countries can be found in other European languages, for example German "Niederlande", French, "les Pays-Bas", and so on, which all literally mean "the Low Countries". In the Dutch language itself (known in Dutch as ""Nederlands"", meaning "Netherlandish") no plural is used for the name of the modern country. So "Nederland" (singular) is used for the modern nation and "de Nederlanden" (plural) for the 16th century domains of Charles V. (However, in official use the name of the Dutch kingdom is still Kingdom of the Netherlands ("Koninkrijk der Nederlanden"), a name deriving from the 19th century origins of the kingdom which originally included present-day Belgium.)
In Dutch, and to a lesser extent in English, the Low Countries colloquially means the Netherlands and Belgium, sometimes the Netherlands and Flanders—the Dutch-speaking north of Belgium. (This version does not include Luxembourg.) For example, a 'Derby der Lage Landen' (Derby of the Low Countries), is a sports event between Belgium and the Netherlands.
"Belgium" was renamed only in 1830, after splitting from the Kingdom of the Netherlands, in order to distinguish it from its northern neighbour. It had previously also commonly been referred to as one part of the geographic "Netherlands", being the part which remained in the hands of the Habsburg heirs of the Burgundian Dukes until the French Revolution. Politically, before the Napoleonic wars, it was referred to as the "Southern", "Spanish" or later "Austrian" Netherlands. It is still referred to as part of the "low countries".
History.
The region politically had its origins in Carolingian empire; more precisely, most of it was within the Duchy of Lower Lotharingia. After the disintegration of Lower Lotharingia, the Low Countries were brought under the rule of various lordships until they came to be in the hands of the Valois Dukes of Burgundy. Hence, a large part of the low countries came to be referred to as the Burgundian Netherlands also called the Seventeen Provinces up to 1581. Even after the political secession of the autonomous Dutch Republic (or "United Provinces") in the north, the term "low countries" continued to be used to refer collectively to the region. The region was temporarily united politically between 1815 and 1839, as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, before this split into the three modern countries of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.
Early history.
The Low Countries were part of the Roman provinces of Gallia Belgica, Germania Inferior and Germania Superior. They were inhabited by Belgic and Germanic tribes. In the 4th and 5th century, Frankish tribes had entered this Roman region and came to run it increasingly independently. They came to be ruled by the Merovingian dynasty, under which dynasty the southern part (below the Rhine) was re-Christianised.
Frankish empire.
By the end of the 8th century, the Low Countries formed a core part of a much expanded Francia and the Merovingians were replaced by the Carolingian dynasty. In 800 the Pope crowned and appointed Charlemagne Emperor of the re-established Roman Empire.
After the death of Charlemagne, Francia was divided in three parts among his three grandsons. The middle slice, Middle Francia, was ruled by Lothair I, and thereby also came to be referred to as "Lotharingia" or "Lorraine". Apart from the original coastal County of Flanders, which was within West Francia, the rest of the Low Countries were within the lowland part of this, "Lower Lorraine".
After the death of Lothair, the Low Countries were coveted by the rulers of both West Francia and East Francia. Each tried to swallow the region and to merge it with their spheres of influence. Thus, the Low Countries consisted of fiefs whose sovereignty resided with either the Kingdom of France (987–1498) or the Holy Roman Empire. While the further history the Low Countries can be seen as the object of a continual struggle between these two powers, the title of Duke of Lothier was coveted in the low countries for centuries.
Duchy of Burgundy.
Gradually, separate fiefs came to be ruled by a single family through royal intermarriage. This process culminated in the rule of the House of Valois, who were the rulers of the Duchy of Burgundy. In 1477 the Burgundian holdings in the area, the Burgundian Netherlands passed through an heiress—Mary of Burgundy—to the Habsburgs.
Seventeen Provinces.
In the following century the "Low Countries" corresponded roughly to the Seventeen Provinces covered by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, which freed the provinces from their archaic feudal obligations.
After the northern Seven United Provinces of the seventeen declared their independence from Habsburg Spain in 1581, the ten provinces of the Southern Netherlands remained occupied by the Army of Flanders under Spanish service and are therefore sometimes called the "Spanish Netherlands". In 1713, under the Treaty of Utrecht following the War of the Spanish Succession, what was left of the Spanish Netherlands was ceded to Austria and thus became known as the Austrian Netherlands. The United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815–1830) temporarily united the Low Countries again.
After the Second World War.
After the Second World War, Benelux was the name used for the trading region of the sovereign states of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg.
Literature.
One of the Low Countries' earliest literary figures is the blind poet Bernlef, from , who sang both Christian psalms and pagan verses. Bernlef is representative of the coexistence of Christianity and Germanic polytheism in this time period.
The earliest examples of written literature include the Wachtendonck Psalms, a collections of twenty five psalms that originated in the Moselle-Frankish region around the middle of the 9th century.

</doc>
<doc id="51408" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51408" title="Half Dome">
Half Dome

Half Dome is a granite dome at the eastern end of Yosemite Valley in Yosemite National Park, California. It is a well-known rock formation in the park, named for its distinct shape. One side is a sheer face while the other three sides are smooth and round, making it appear like a dome cut in half. The granite crest rises more than above the valley floor.
Geology.
The impression from the valley floor that this is a round dome that has lost its northwest half is an illusion. From Washburn Point, Half Dome can be seen as a thin ridge of rock, an arête, that is oriented northeast-southwest, with its southeast side almost as steep as its northwest side except for the very top. Although the trend of this ridge, as well as that of Tenaya Canyon, is probably controlled by master joints, 80 percent of the northwest "half" of the original dome may well still be there.
On March 28, 2009, a large rock slide of occurred from Ahwiyah Point. The slide happened at 5:26 a.m. and damaged a large area under the dome. No one was injured, but hundreds of trees were knocked down, and a portion of the Mirror Lake trail was buried. The slide registered on seismographs as an earthquake reaching 2.5 on the Richter Scale.
Ascents.
As late as the 1870s, Half Dome was described as "perfectly inaccessible" by Josiah Whitney of the California Geological Survey. The summit was finally conquered by George G. Anderson in October 1875, via a route constructed by drilling and placing iron eyebolts into the smooth granite.
Today, Half Dome may now be ascended in several different ways. Thousands of hikers reach the top each year by following an trail from the valley floor. After a rigorous approach, including several hundred feet of granite stairs, the final pitch up the peak's steep but somewhat rounded east face is ascended with the aid of a pair of post-mounted braided steel cables originally constructed close to the Anderson route in 1919.
Alternatively, over a dozen rock climbing routes lead from the valley up Half Dome's vertical northwest face. The first technical ascent was in 1957 via a route pioneered by Royal Robbins, Mike Sherrick, and Jerry Gallwas, today known as the Regular Northwest Face. Their five-day epic was the first Grade VI climb in the United States. Their route has now been free soloed several times in a few hours' time. Other technical routes ascend the south face and the west shoulder.
Hiking the Cable Route.
The Half Dome Cable Route hike runs from the valley floor to the top of the dome in (via the Mist Trail), with of elevation gain. The length and difficulty of the trail used to keep it less crowded than other park trails, but in recent years the trail traffic has grown to as many as 800 people a day. The hike can be done from the valley floor in a single long day, but many people break it up by camping overnight in Little Yosemite Valley. The trail climbs past Vernal and Nevada Falls, then continues into Little Yosemite Valley, then north to the base of the northeast ridge of Half Dome itself.
The final ascent is steeply up the rock between two steel cables used as handholds. The cables are fixed with bolts in the rock and raised onto a series of metal poles in late May (the poles do not anchor the cables). The cables are taken down from the poles for the winter in early October, but they are still fixed to the rock surface and can be used. The National Park Service recommends against climbing the route when the cables are down and when the surface of the rock is wet and slippery. The "Cable Route" is rated class 3, while the same face away from the cables is rated class 5.
The Cable Route can be crowded. In past years, as many as 1,000 hikers per day have sometimes climbed the dome on a summer weekend, and about 50,000 hikers climb it every year.
In January 2010, the National Park Service announced that permits will be required to hike the Cable Route on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, and federal holidays. The park service cited safety concerns and increased crowding on the route as reasons for the new regulations. Permits will be issued only through the National Recreation Reservation Service from four months in advance to one week in advance. A maximum of 400 permits per day will be issued, and a processing fee of $1.50 per permit will be charged. Permits will not be issued in the park.
In December 2010, NPS officials announced that the permit system would be expanded to seven days per week beginning with the 2011 ascent season. All hikers who intend to ascend the Cable Route must now obtain permits before entering the park. Permits will be checked by a ranger on the trail, and no hikers without permits are allowed to hike beyond the base of the sub-dome or to the bottom of the cables. Hikers caught bypassing the rangers to visit either the sub-dome or main dome without a permit face fines of up to $5,000 and/or 6 months in jail.
Backpackers with an appropriate wilderness permit can receive a Half Dome permit when they pick up their wilderness permit with no additional reservation required. Rock climbers who reach the top of Half Dome without entering the subdome area can descend on the Half Dome Trail without a permit.
The top of Half Dome is a large, flat area where climbers can relax and enjoy their accomplishment. The summit offers views of the surrounding areas, including Little Yosemite Valley and the Valley Floor. A notable location to one side of Half Dome is the "Diving Board", where Ansel Adams took his photograph "Monolith, The Face of Half Dome" on April 10, 1927. Often confused with "the Visor," a small overhanging ledge at the summit, the Diving Board is on the shoulder of Half Dome.
From 1919 when the cables were erected through 2011, there have been six fatal falls from the cables. The latest fatality occurred on July 31, 2011.
Lightning strikes can be a risk while on or near the summit. On July 27, 1985, five hikers were struck by lightning, resulting in two fatalities.
The Cable Route was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2012.
In culture.
Half Dome was originally called ""Tis-sa-ack"", meaning Cleft Rock in the language of the local Ahwahnechee people. Tis-sa-ack is also the name of the fourth route on the formation, ascended by Royal Robbins and Don Peterson over eight days in October 1969. Tis-sa-ack is the name of a mother from a native legend. The face seen in Half Dome is supposed to be hers. Tis-sa-ack is the name of a Mono Lake Paiute Indian girl in the Yosemite Native American legend. John Muir referred to the peak as "Tissiack".
Others say Ahwahneechee Native Americans named Half Dome “Face of a Young Woman Stained with Tears” ("Tis-se’-yak") because of the colonies of brown-black lichens that form dark vertical drip-like stripes along drainage tracks in the rock faces.
In 1988, Half Dome was featured on a 25 cent United States postage stamp. An image of Half Dome, along with John Muir and the California condor, appears on the California State Quarter, released in January 2005.
Starting October 2010, an image of Half Dome is included on the new revised California drivers license in the top right-hand corner.
In 2014, Apple revealed their new version of their operating system, Yosemite, and Half Dome was the default wallpaper on the new OS.
Half Dome is also an element or inspiration of various company and organization logos, including that of The North Face, Sierra Designs, & Mountain Khakis outdoor product companies, the Sierra Club environmental group and the Sierra Entertainment game studio.
In 2015, American music artist Toro y Moi, real name Chazwick Bundick, released a song called 'Half Dome' from his album 'What For?'. The song was inspired by a hike he took up the dome. On the hike he happened to meet photographer R. Adam Prieto who was a fan of Bundick's music. Prieto agreed to create the music video for 'Half Dome'. The video features time-lapse videos of the dome and surrounding area.

</doc>
<doc id="51411" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51411" title="Probability and statistics">
Probability and statistics

Probability and statistics are two related but separate academic disciplines. Statistical analysis often uses probability distributions, and the two topics are often studied together. However, probability theory contains much that is mostly of mathematical interest and not directly relevant to statistics. Moreover, many topics in statistics are independent of probability theory. 

</doc>
<doc id="51414" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51414" title="Fundamental theorem of algebra">
Fundamental theorem of algebra

The fundamental theorem of algebra states that every non-constant single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one complex root. This includes polynomials with real coefficients, since every real number is a complex number with an imaginary part equal to zero.
Equivalently (by definition), the theorem states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed.
The theorem is also stated as follows: every non-zero, single-variable, degree "n" polynomial with complex coefficients has, counted with multiplicity, exactly "n" roots. The equivalence of the two statements can be proven through the use of successive polynomial division.
In spite of its name, there is no purely algebraic proof of the theorem, since any proof must use the completeness of the reals (or some other equivalent formulation of completeness), which is not an algebraic concept. Additionally, it is not fundamental for modern algebra; its name was given at a time when the study of algebra was mainly concerned with the solutions of polynomial equations with real or complex coefficients.
History.
Peter Roth, in his book "Arithmetica Philosophica" (published in 1608, at Nürnberg, by Johann Lantzenberger), wrote that a polynomial equation of degree "n" (with real coefficients) "may" have "n" solutions. Albert Girard, in his book "L'invention nouvelle en l'Algèbre" (published in 1629), asserted that a polynomial equation of degree "n" has "n" solutions, but he did not state that they had to be real numbers. Furthermore, he added that his assertion holds "unless the equation is incomplete", by which he meant that no coefficient is equal to 0. However, when he explains in detail what he means, it is clear that he actually believes that his assertion is always true; for instance, he shows that the equation "x"4 = 4x − 3, although incomplete, has four solutions (counting multiplicities): 1 (twice), −1 + "i"√2, and −1 − "i"√2.
As will be mentioned again below, it follows from the fundamental theorem of algebra that every non-constant polynomial with real coefficients can be written as a product of polynomials with real coefficients whose degree is either 1 or 2. However, in 1702 Leibniz said that no polynomial of the type "x"4 + "a"4 (with "a" real and distinct from 0) can be written in such a way. Later, Nikolaus Bernoulli made the same assertion concerning the polynomial "x"4 −  4"x"3 + 2"x"2 + 4"x" + 4, but he got a letter from Euler in 1742 in which he was told that his polynomial happened to be equal to
where α is the square root of 4 + 2√7. Also, Euler mentioned that
A first attempt at proving the theorem was made by d'Alembert in 1746, but his proof was incomplete. Among other problems, it assumed implicitly a theorem (now known as Puiseux's theorem) which would not be proved until more than a century later, and furthermore the proof assumed the fundamental theorem of algebra. Other attempts were made by Euler (1749), de Foncenex (1759), Lagrange (1772), and Laplace (1795). These last four attempts assumed implicitly Girard's assertion; to be more precise, the existence of solutions was assumed and all that remained to be proved was that their form was "a" + "bi" for some real numbers "a" and "b". In modern terms, Euler, de Foncenex, Lagrange, and Laplace were assuming the existence of a splitting field of the polynomial "p"("z").
At the end of the 18th century, two new proofs were published which did not assume the existence of roots. One of them, due to James Wood and mainly algebraic, was published in 1798 and it was totally ignored. Wood's proof had an algebraic gap. The other one was published by Gauss in 1799 and it was mainly geometric, but it had a topological gap, filled by Alexander Ostrowski in 1920, as discussed in Smale 1981 [http://projecteuclid.org/DPubS?service=UI&version=1.0&verb=Display&handle=euclid.bams/1183547848] (Smale writes, "...I wish to point out what an immense gap Gauss' proof contained. It is a subtle point even today that a real algebraic plane curve cannot enter a disk without leaving. In fact even though Gauss redid this proof 50 years later, the gap remained. It was not until 1920 that Gauss' proof was completed. In the reference Gauss, A. Ostrowski has a paper which does this and gives an excellent discussion of the problem as well..."). A rigorous proof was published by Argand in 1806 (and revisited in 1813); it was here that, for the first time, the fundamental theorem of algebra was stated for polynomials with complex coefficients, rather than just real coefficients. Gauss produced two other proofs in 1816 and another version of his original proof in 1849.
The first textbook containing a proof of the theorem was Cauchy's "Cours d'analyse de l'École Royale Polytechnique" (1821). It contained Argand's proof, although Argand is not credited for it.
None of the proofs mentioned so far is constructive. It was Weierstrass who raised for the first time, in the middle of the 19th century, the problem of finding a constructive proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. He presented his solution, that amounts in modern terms to a combination of the Durand–Kerner method with the homotopy continuation principle, in 1891. Another proof of this kind was obtained by Hellmuth Kneser in 1940 and simplified by his son Martin Kneser in 1981.
Without using countable choice, it is not possible to constructively prove the fundamental theorem of algebra for complex numbers based on the Dedekind real numbers (which are not constructively equivalent to the Cauchy real numbers without countable choice
Proofs.
All proofs below involve some analysis, or at least the topological concept of continuity of real or complex functions. Some also use differentiable or even analytic functions. This fact has led to the remark that the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is neither fundamental, nor a theorem of algebra.
Some proofs of the theorem only prove that any non-constant polynomial with real coefficients has some complex root. This is enough to establish the theorem in the general case because, given a non-constant polynomial "p"("z") with complex coefficients, the polynomial
has only real coefficients and, if "z" is a zero of "q"("z"), then either "z" or its conjugate is a root of "p"("z").
A large number of non-algebraic proofs of the theorem use the fact (sometimes called "growth lemma") that an "n"-th degree polynomial function "p"("z") whose dominant coefficient is 1 behaves like "zn" when |"z"| is large enough. A more precise statement is: there is some positive real number "R" such that:
when |"z"| > "R".
Complex-analytic proofs.
Find a closed disk "D" of radius "r" centered at the origin such that |"p"("z")| > |"p"(0)| whenever |"z"| ≥ "r". The minimum of |"p"("z")| on "D", which must exist since "D" is compact, is therefore achieved at some point "z"0 in the interior of "D", but not at any point of its boundary. The Maximum modulus principle (applied to 1/"p"("z")) implies then that "p"("z"0) = 0. In other words, "z"0 is a zero of "p"("z").
A variation of this proof does not require the use of the maximum modulus principle (in fact, the same argument with minor changes also gives a proof of the maximum modulus principle for holomorphic functions). If we assume by contradiction that "a" := "p"("z"0) ≠ 0, then, expanding "p"("z") in powers of "z" − "z"0 we can write
Here, the "cj" are simply the coefficients of the polynomial "z" → "p"("z" + "z"0), and we let "k" be the index of the first coefficient following the constant term that is non-zero. But now we see that for "z" sufficiently close to "z"0 this has behavior asymptotically similar to the simpler polynomial formula_6, in the sense that (as is easy to check) the function formula_7 is bounded by some positive constant "M" in some neighborhood of "z"0. Therefore if we define formula_8 and let formula_9, then for any sufficiently small positive number "r" (so that the bound "M" mentioned above holds), using the triangle inequality we see that
When "r" is sufficiently close to 0 this upper bound for |"p"("z")| is strictly smaller than |"a"|, in contradiction to the definition of "z"0. (Geometrically, we have found an explicit direction θ0 such that if one approaches "z"0 from that direction one can obtain values "p"("z") smaller in absolute value than |"p"("z"0)|.)
Another analytic proof can be obtained along this line of thought observing that, since |"p"("z")| > |"p"(0)| outside "D", the minimum of |"p"("z")| on the whole complex plane is achieved at "z"0. If |"p"("z"0)| > 0, then 1/"p" is a bounded holomorphic function in the entire complex plane since, for each complex number "z", |1/"p"("z")| ≤ |1/"p"("z"0)|. Applying Liouville's theorem, which states that a bounded entire function must be constant, this would imply that 1/"p" is constant and therefore that "p" is constant. This gives a contradiction, and hence "p"("z"0) = 0.
Yet another analytic proof uses the argument principle. Let "R" be a positive real number large enough so that every root of "p"("z") has absolute value smaller than "R"; such a number must exist because every non-constant polynomial function of degree "n" has at most "n" zeros. For each "r" > "R", consider the number
where "c"("r") is the circle centered at 0 with radius "r" oriented counterclockwise; then the argument principle says that this number is the number "N" of zeros of "p"("z") in the open ball centered at 0 with radius "r", which, since "r" > "R", is the total number of zeros of "p"("z"). On the other hand, the integral of "n"/"z" along "c"("r") divided by 2π"i" is equal to "n". But the difference between the two numbers is
The numerator of the rational expression being integrated has degree at most "n" - 1 and the degree of the denominator is "n" + 1. Therefore, the number above tends to 0 as "r" → +∞. But the number is also equal to "N" − "n" and so "N" = "n".
Still another complex-analytic proof can be given by combining linear algebra with the Cauchy theorem. To establish that every complex polynomial of degree "n" > 0 has a zero, it suffices to show that every complex square matrix of size "n" > 0 has a (complex) eigenvalue. The proof of the latter statement is by contradiction.
Let "A" be a complex square matrix of size "n" > 0 and let "In" be the unit matrix of the same size. Assume "A" has no eigenvalues. Consider the resolvent function
which is a meromorphic function on the complex plane with values in the vector space of matrices. The eigenvalues of "A" are precisely the poles of "R(z)". Since, by assumption, "A" has no eigenvalues, the function "R(z)" is an entire function and Cauchy theorem implies that
On the other hand, "R"("z") expanded as a geometric series gives:
This formula is valid outside the closed disc of radius ||"A"|| (the operator norm of "A"). Let "r" > ||"A"||. Then
(in which only the summand "k" = 0 has a nonzero integral). This is a contradiction, and so "A" has an eigenvalue.
Finally, Rouché's theorem gives perhaps the shortest proof of the theorem.
Topological proofs.
Let "z"0 ∈ C be such that the minimum of |"p"("z")| on the whole complex plane is achieved at "z"0; it was seen at the proof which uses Liouville's theorem that such a number must exist. We can write "p"("z") as a polynomial in "z" − "z"0: there is some natural number "k" and there are some complex numbers "ck", "c""k" + 1, ..., "cn" such that "ck" ≠ 0 and that
In the case that "p"("z"0) is nonzero, it follows that if "a" is a "k"th root of −"p"("z"0)/"ck" and if "t" is positive and sufficiently small, then |"p"("z"0 + "ta")| < |"p"("z"0)|, which is impossible, since |"p"("z"0)| is the minimum of |"p"| on "D".
For another topological proof by contradiction, suppose that "p"("z") has no zeros. Choose a large positive number "R" such that, for |"z"| = "R", the leading term "zn" of "p"("z") dominates all other terms combined; in other words, such that |"z"|"n" > |"a""n"−1"z""n"−1 + ··· + "a"0|. As "z" traverses the circle given by the equation |"z"| = "R" once counter-clockwise, "p"("z"), like "zn", winds "n" times counter-clockwise around 0. At the other extreme, with |"z"| = 0, the "curve" "p"("z") is simply the single (nonzero) point "p"(0), whose winding number is clearly 0. If the loop followed by "z" is continuously deformed between these extremes, the path of "p"("z") also deforms continuously. We can explicitly write such a deformation as "H"("Re""i"θ,"t") = "p"((1 − "t")"Re""i"θ), where 0 ≤ "t" ≤ 1. If one views the variable "t" as time, then at time zero the curve is "p"("z") and at time one the curve is "p"(0). Clearly at every point "t", "p"("z") cannot be zero by the original assumption, therefore during the deformation, the curve never crosses zero. Therefore the winding number of the curve around zero should never change. However, given that the winding number started as "n" and ended as 0, this is absurd. Therefore, "p"("z") has at least one zero.
Algebraic proofs.
These proofs use two facts about real numbers that require only a small amount of analysis (more precisely, the intermediate value theorem):
The second fact, together with the quadratic formula, implies the theorem for real quadratic polynomials. In other words, algebraic proofs of the fundamental theorem actually show that if "R" is any real-closed field, then its extension "C" = "R"(√−1) is algebraically closed.
As mentioned above, it suffices to check the statement "every non-constant polynomial "p"("z") with real coefficients has a complex root". This statement can be proved by induction on the greatest non-negative integer "k" such that 2"k" divides the degree "n" of "p"("z"). Let "a" be the coefficient of "zn" in "p"("z") and let "F" be a splitting field of "p"("z") over "C"; in other words, the field "F" contains "C" and there are elements "z"1, "z"2, ..., "zn" in "F" such that
If "k" = 0, then "n" is odd, and therefore "p"("z") has a real root. Now, suppose that "n" = 2"km" (with "m" odd and "k" > 0) and that the theorem is already proved when the degree of the polynomial has the form 2"k" − 1"m"′ with "m"′ odd. For a real number "t", define:
Then the coefficients of "qt"("z") are symmetric polynomials in the "zi"'s with real coefficients. Therefore, they can be expressed as polynomials with real coefficients in the elementary symmetric polynomials, that is, in −"a"1, "a"2, ..., (−1)"nan". So "qt"("z") has in fact "real" coefficients. Furthermore, the degree of "qt"("z") is "n"("n" − 1)/2 = 2"k"−1"m"("n" − 1), and "m"("n" − 1) is an odd number. So, using the induction hypothesis, "qt" has at least one complex root; in other words, "zi" + "zj" + "tzizj" is complex for two distinct elements "i" and "j" from {1, ..., "n"}. Since there are more real numbers than pairs ("i", "j"), one can find distinct real numbers "t" and "s" such that "zi" + "zj" + "tzizj" and "zi" + "zj" + "szizj" are complex (for the same "i" and "j"). So, both "zi" + "zj" and "zizj" are complex numbers. It is easy to check that every complex number has a complex square root, thus every complex polynomial of degree 2 has a complex root by the quadratic formula. It follows that "zi" and "zj" are complex numbers, since they are roots of the quadratic polynomial "z"2 −  ("zi" + "zj")"z" + "zizj".
Joseph Shipman showed in 2007 that the assumption that odd degree polynomials have roots is stronger than necessary; any field in which polynomials of prime degree have roots is algebraically closed (so "odd" can be replaced by "odd prime" and furthermore this holds for fields of all characteristics). For axiomatization of algebraically closed fields, this is the best possible, as there are counterexamples if a single prime is excluded. However, these counterexamples rely on −1 having a square root. If we take a field where −1 has no square root, and every polynomial of degree "n" ∈ "I" has a root, where "I" is any fixed infinite set of odd numbers, then every polynomial "f"("x") of odd degree has a root (since has a root, where "k" is chosen so that ). Mohsen Aliabadi generalized Shipman's result for any field in 2013, proving that the sufficient condition for an arbitrary field (of any characteristic) to be algebraically closed is having a root for any polynomial of prime degree.
Another algebraic proof of the fundamental theorem can be given using Galois theory. It suffices to show that C has no proper finite field extension. Let "K"/C be a finite extension. Since the normal closure of "K" over R still has a finite degree over C (or R), we may assume without loss of generality that "K" is a normal extension of R (hence it is a Galois extension, as every algebraic extension of a field of characteristic 0 is separable). Let "G" be the Galois group of this extension, and let "H" be a Sylow 2-subgroup of "G", so that the order of "H" is a power of 2, and the index of "H" in "G" is odd. By the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, there exists a subextension "L" of "K"/R such that Gal("K"/"L") = "H". As ["L":R] = ["G":"H"] is odd, and there are no nonlinear irreducible real polynomials of odd degree, we must have "L" = R, thus ["K":R] and ["K":C] are powers of 2. Assuming by way of contradiction that ["K":C] > 1, we conclude that the 2-group Gal("K"/C) contains a subgroup of index 2, so there exists a subextension "M" of C of degree 2. However, C has no extension of degree 2, because every quadratic complex polynomial has a complex root, as mentioned above. This shows that ["K":C] = 1, and therefore "K" = C, which completes the proof.
Geometric proofs.
There exists still another way to approach the fundamental theorem of algebra, due to J. M. Almira and A. Romero: by Riemannian Geometric arguments. The main idea here is to prove that the existence of a non-constant polynomial "p"("z") without zeros implies the existence of a flat Riemannian metric over the sphere S2. This leads to a contradiction, since the sphere is not flat.
Recall that a Riemannian surface ("M", "g") is said to be flat if its Gaussian curvature, which we denote by "Kg", is identically null. Now, Gauss–Bonnet theorem, when applied to the sphere S2, claims that
which proves that the sphere is not flat.
Let us now assume that "n" > 0 and "p"("z") = "a"0 + "a"1"z" + ⋅⋅⋅ + "anzn" ≠ 0 for each complex number "z". Let us define "p*"("z") = "znp"("1/z") = "a"0"zn" + "a"1"z""n"−1 + ⋅⋅⋅ + "an". Obviously, "p*"("z") ≠ 0 for all "z" in C. Consider the polynomial "f"("z") = "p"("z")"p*"("z"). Then "f"("z") ≠ 0 for each "z" in C. Furthermore,
We can use this functional equation to prove that "g", given by
for "w" in C, and
for "w" ∈ S2\{0}, is a well defined Riemannian metric over the sphere S2 (which we identify with the extended complex plane C ∪ {∞}).
Now, a simple computation shows that
since the real part of an analytic function is harmonic. This proves that "Kg" = 0.
Corollaries.
Since the fundamental theorem of algebra can be seen as the statement that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed, it follows that any theorem concerning algebraically closed fields applies to the field of complex numbers. Here are a few more consequences of the theorem, which are either about the field of real numbers or about the relationship between the field of real numbers and the field of complex numbers:
Bounds on the zeros of a polynomial.
While the fundamental theorem of algebra states a general existence result, it is of some interest, both from the theoretical and from the practical point of view, to have information on the location of the zeros of a given polynomial. The simpler result in this direction is a bound on the modulus: all zeros ζ of a monic polynomial formula_25 satisfy an inequality |ζ| ≤ "R"∞, where
Notice that, as stated, this is not yet an existence result but rather an example of what is called an a priori bound: it says that "if there are solutions" then they lie inside the closed disk of center the origin and radius "R"∞. However, once coupled with the fundamental theorem of algebra it says that the disk contains in fact at least one solution. More generally, a bound can be given directly in terms of any p-norm of the "n"-vector of coefficients formula_27, that is |ζ| ≤ "Rp", where "Rp" is precisely the "q"-norm of the 2-vector formula_28, "q" being the conjugate exponent of "p", 1/"p" + 1/"q" = 1, for any 1 ≤ "p" ≤ ∞. Thus, the modulus of any solution is also bounded by
for 1 < "p" < ∞, and in particular
(where we define "an" to mean 1, which is reasonable since 1 is indeed the "n"-th coefficient of our polynomial). The case of a generic polynomial of degree n, formula_32, is of course reduced to the case of a monic, dividing all coefficients by "an" ≠ 0. Also, in case that 0 is not a root, i.e. "a"0 ≠ 0., bounds from below on the roots ζ follow immediately as bounds from above on formula_33, that is, the roots of formula_34. Finally, the distance formula_35 from the roots ζ to any point formula_36 can be estimated from below and above, seeing formula_37 as zeros of the polynomial formula_38, whose coefficients are the Taylor expansion of "P"("z") at formula_39
Let ζ be a root of the polynomial formula_25; in order to prove the inequality |ζ| ≤ "Rp" we can assume, of course, |ζ| > 1. Writing the equation as formula_41, and using the Hölder's inequality we find formula_42. Now, if "p" = 1, this is formula_43, thus formula_44. In the case 1 < "p" ≤ ∞, taking into account the summation formula for a geometric progression, we have
thus formula_46 and simplifying, formula_47. Therefore formula_48 holds, for all 1 ≤ "p" ≤ ∞.

</doc>
<doc id="51418" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51418" title="Nikos Kazantzakis">
Nikos Kazantzakis

Nikos Kazantzakis (; 18 February 188326 October 1957) was a Greek writer, celebrated for his novels which include "Zorba the Greek" (published 1946 as "Life and Times of Alexis Zorbas"), "Christ Recrucified" (1948), "Captain Michalis" (1950, translated 'Freedom or Death), and "The Last Temptation of Christ" (1955). He also wrote plays, travel books, memoirs and philosophical essays such as "The Saviors of God: Spiritual Exercises".
His fame was further spread in the English speaking world by cinematic adaptations of "Zorba the Greek (1964)" and "The Last Temptation of Christ" (1988).
Biography.
When Kazantzakis was born in 1883 in Heraklion, Crete had not yet joined the modern Greek state, (which had been established in 1832) and was still under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. From 1902 to 1906 Kazantzakis studied law at the University of Athens: his 1906 Juris Doctor thesis title was "Ο Φρειδερίκος Νίτσε εν τη φιλοσοφία του δικαίου και της πολιτείας" ("Friedrich Nietzsche on the Philosophy of Right and the State"). Then he went to the Sorbonne in 1907 to study philosophy. There he fell under the influence of Henri Bergson. His 1909 doctoral dissertation at the Sorbonne was a reworked version of his 1906 dissertation under the title "Friedrich Nietzsche dans la philosophie du droit et de la cité" ("Friedrich Nietzsche on the Philosophy of Right and the State"). Upon his return to Greece, he began translating works of philosophy. In 1914 he met Angelos Sikelianos. Together they travelled for two years in places where Greek Orthodox Christian culture flourished, largely influenced by the enthusiastic nationalism of Sikelianos.
Kazantzakis married Galatea Alexiou in 1911; they divorced in 1926. He married Eleni Samiou in 1945. Between 1922 and his death in 1957, he sojourned in Paris and Berlin (from 1922 to 1924), Italy, Russia (in 1925), Spain (in 1932), and then later in Cyprus, Aegina, Egypt, Mount Sinai, Czechoslovakia, Nice (he later bought a villa in nearby Antibes, in the Old Town section near the famed seawall), China, and Japan. While in Berlin, where the political situation was explosive, Kazantzakis discovered communism and became an admirer of Vladimir Lenin. He never became a committed communist, but visited the Soviet Union and stayed with the Left Opposition politician and writer Victor Serge. He witnessed the rise of Joseph Stalin, and became disillusioned with Soviet-style communism. Around this time, his earlier nationalist beliefs were gradually replaced by a more universalist ideology.
In 1945, he became the leader of a small party on the non-communist left, and entered the Greek government as Minister without Portfolio. He resigned this post the following year. In 1946, The Society of Greek Writers recommended that Kazantzakis and Angelos Sikelianos be awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature. In 1957, he lost the Prize to Albert Camus by one vote. Camus later said that Kazantzakis deserved the honour "a hundred times more" than himself. In total Kazantzakis was nominated in nine different years. Late in 1957, even though suffering from leukemia, he set out on one last trip to China and Japan. Falling ill on his return flight, he was transferred to Freiburg, Germany, where he died. He is buried on the wall surrounding the city of Heraklion near the Chania Gate, because the Orthodox Church ruled out his being buried in a cemetery. His epitaph reads "I hope for nothing. I fear nothing. I am free." (Δεν ελπίζω τίποτα. Δε φοβούμαι τίποτα. Είμαι λέφτερος.)
The 50th anniversary of the death of Nikos Kazantzakis was selected as main motif for a high value euro collectors' coin; the €10 Greek Nikos Kazantzakis commemorative coin, minted in 2007. His image is on the obverse of the coin, while the reverse carries the National Emblem of Greece with his signature.
Literary work.
His first work was the 1906 narrative "Serpent and Lily" (Όφις και Κρίνο), which he signed with the pen name Karma Nirvami. In 1909, Kazantzakis wrote a one-act play titled "Comedy", which remarkably resonates existential themes that become prevalent much later in Post-World War II Europe by writers like Sartre and Camus. In 1910, after his studies in Paris, he wrote a tragedy, "The Master Builder" (Ο Πρωτομάστορας), based on a popular Greek folkloric myth. Kazantzakis considered his huge epic poem (33,333 verses long) "" to be his most important work. Begun in 1924, he rewrote it seven times before publishing it in 1938. According to another Greek author, Pantelis Prevelakis, "it has been a superhuman effort to record his immense spiritual experience." Following the structure of Homer's Odyssey, it is divided into 24 rhapsodies.
His most famous novels include "Zorba the Greek" (1946, in Greek Βίος και Πολιτεία του Αλέξη Ζορμπά); "Christ Recrucified" (1948, UK title "Christ Recrucified", in Greek Ο Χριστός Ξανασταυρώνεται); "Captain Michalis" (1950, UK title "Freedom and Death", in Greek Καπετάν Μιχάλης); "The Last Temptation of Christ" (1955, Ο Τελευταίος Πειρασμός); and "Saint Francis" (1956, UK title "God's Pauper: St. Francis of Assisi", in Greek Ο Φτωχούλης του Θεού). "Report to Greco" (1961, Αναφορά στον Γκρέκο), containing both autobiographical and fictional elements, summed up his philosophy as the "Cretan Glance."
Starting in his youth, Kazantzakis was spiritually restless. Tortured by metaphysical and existential concerns, he sought relief in knowledge and travel, contact with a diverse set of people, in every kind of experience. The influence of Friedrich Nietzsche on his work is evident, especially Nietzsche's atheism and sympathy for the superman (Übermensch) concept. However, he was also haunted by spiritual concerns. To attain a union with God, Kazantzakis entered a monastery for six months. In 1927 Kazantzakis published in Greek his "Spiritual Exercises" (Greek: "Ασκητική"), which he had composed in Berlin in 1923. The book was translated into English and published in 1960 with the title "The Saviors of God".
The figure of Jesus was ever-present in his thoughts, from his youth to his last years. The Christ of "The Last Temptation of Christ" shares Katzantzakis' anguished metaphysical and existential concerns, seeking answers to haunting questions and often torn between his sense of duty and mission, on one side, and his own human needs to enjoy life, to love and to be loved, and to have a family. A tragic figure who at the end sacrifices his own human hopes for a wider cause, Kazantzakis' Christ is not an infallible, passionless deity but rather a passionate and emotional human being who has been assigned a mission, with a meaning that he is struggling to understand and that often requires him to face his conscience and his emotions, and ultimately to sacrifice his own life for its fulfilment. He is subject to doubts, fears and even guilt. In the end he is the "Son of Man", a man whose internal struggle represents that of humanity.
Many Orthodox Church clergy condemned Kazantzakis' work and a campaign was started to excommunicate him. His reply was: ""You gave me a curse, Holy fathers, I give you a blessing: may your conscience be as clear as mine and may you be as moral and religious as I"" (Greek: ""Μου δώσατε μια κατάρα, Άγιοι πατέρες, σας δίνω κι εγώ μια ευχή: Σας εύχομαι να ‘ναι η συνείδηση σας τόσο καθαρή, όσο είναι η δική μου και να ‘στε τόσο ηθικοί και θρήσκοι όσο είμαι εγώ""). The excommunication was rejected by the top leadership of the Orthodox Church but emblematic of persistent disapprobation from many Christian authorities for his political and religious views.
In Kazantzakis' day, the international market for material published in modern Greek was quite small. Kazantzakis also wrote in colloquial Demotic Greek, with traces of Cretan dialect, which made his writings all the more controversial in conservative literary circles at home. Translations of his books into other European languages did not appear until his old age. Hence he found it difficult to earn a living by writing, which led him to write a great deal, including a large number of translations from French, German, and English, and curiosities such as French fiction and Greek primary school texts, mainly because he needed the money. Some of this "popular" writing was nevertheless distinguished, such as his books based on his extensive travels, which appeared in the series "Travelling" (Ταξιδεύοντας) which he founded. These books on Greece, Italy, Egypt, Sinai, Cyprus, Spain, Russia, Japan, China, and England were masterpieces of Greek travel literature.

</doc>
<doc id="51420" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51420" title="Carbonic acid">
Carbonic acid

Carbonic acid is a chemical compound with the chemical formula H2CO3 (equivalently OC(OH)2). It is also a name sometimes given to solutions of carbon dioxide in water (carbonated water), because such solutions contain small amounts of H2CO3. In physiology, carbonic acid is described as "volatile acid" or "respiratory acid", because it is the only acid excreted as a gas by the lungs.
Carbonic acid, which is a weak acid, forms two kinds of salts, the carbonates and the bicarbonates. In geology, carbonic acid causes limestone to dissolve producing calcium bicarbonate which leads to many limestone features such as stalactites and stalagmites.
The long-held belief that carbonic acid could not exist as a pure compound was disproved, in 1993, by the preparation of the pure substance. This was independently confirmed in 2011.
Chemical equilibrium.
When carbon dioxide dissolves in water it exists in chemical equilibrium producing carbonic acid:
The hydration equilibrium constant at 25 °C is called Kh, which in the case of carbonic acid is [H2CO3]/[CO2] ≈ 1.7×10−3 in pure water and ≈ 1.2×10−3 in seawater. Hence, the majority of the carbon dioxide is not converted into carbonic acid, remaining as CO2 molecules. In the absence of a catalyst, the equilibrium is reached quite slowly. The rate constants are 0.039 s−1 for the forward reaction (CO2 + H2O → H2CO3) and 23 s−1 for the reverse reaction (H2CO3 → CO2 + H2O). Carbonic acid is used in the making of soft drinks, inexpensive and artificially carbonated sparkling wines, and other bubbly drinks. The addition of two molecules of water to CO2 would give "orthocarbonic acid", C(OH)4, which exists only in minute amounts in aqueous solution.
Addition of base to an excess of carbonic acid gives bicarbonate (hydrogen carbonate). With excess base, carbonic acid reacts to give carbonate salts.
Role of carbonic acid in blood.
Carbonic acid is an intermediate step in the transport of CO2 out of the body via respiratory gas exchange. The hydration reaction of CO2 is generally very slow in the absence of a catalyst, but red blood cells contain carbonic anhydrase, which both increases the reaction rate and dissociates a hydrogen ion (H+) from the resulting carbonic acid, leaving bicarbonate (HCO3−) dissolved in the blood plasma. This catalysed reaction is reversed in the lungs, where it converts the bicarbonate back into CO2 and allows it to be expelled. This equilibration plays an important role as a buffer in mammalian blood. Recent theoretical report suggests that carbonic acid may have pivotal role in protonating various nitrogen bases in blood serum.
Role of carbonic acid in ocean chemistry.
The oceans of the world have absorbed almost half of the CO2 emitted by humans from the burning of fossil fuels.  It has been hypothesised that the extra dissolved carbon dioxide has caused the ocean's average surface pH to shift by about -0.1 unit from pre-industrial levels. This theory is known as ocean acidification.
Acidity of carbonic acid.
Carbonic acid is one of the polyprotic acids: It is diprotic - it has two protons, which may dissociate from the parent molecule. Thus, there are two dissociation constants, the first one for the dissociation into the bicarbonate (also called hydrogen carbonate) ion HCO3−:
Care must be taken when quoting and using the first dissociation constant of carbonic acid. In aqueous solution, carbonic acid exists in equilibrium with carbon dioxide, and the concentration of H2CO3 is much lower than the concentration of CO2. In many analyses, H2CO3 includes dissolved CO2 (referred to as CO2(aq)), H2CO3* is used to represent the two species when writing the aqueous chemical equilibrium equation. The equation may be rewritten as follows:
Whereas this apparent p"K"a is quoted as the dissociation constant of carbonic acid, it is ambiguous: it might better be referred to as the acidity constant of dissolved carbon dioxide, as it is particularly useful for calculating the pH of CO2-containing solutions. A similar situation applies to sulfurous acid (H2SO3), which exists in equilibrium with substantial amounts of unhydrated sulfur dioxide.
The second constant is for the dissociation of the bicarbonate ion into the carbonate ion CO32−:
The three acidity constants are defined as follows:
formula_1
pH and composition of carbonic acid solutions.
At a given temperature, the composition of a pure carbonic acid solution (or of a pure CO2 solution) is completely determined by the partial pressure formula_2 of carbon dioxide above the solution. To calculate this composition, account must be taken of the above equilibria between the three different carbonate forms (H2CO3, HCO3− and CO32−) as well as of the hydration equilibrium between dissolved CO2 and H2CO3 with constant formula_3 (see above) and of the following equilibrium between the dissolved CO2 and the gaseous CO2 above the solution:
The corresponding equilibrium equations together with the formula_5 relation and the charge neutrality condition formula_6 result in six equations for the six unknowns [H2CO3, [OH−, and [CO32−, showing that the composition of the solution is fully determined by formula_2. The equation obtained for [H+] is a cubic whose numerical solution yields the following values for the pH and the different species concentrations:
As noted above, may be neglected for this specific problem, resulting in the following very precise analytical expression for [H+:
Spectroscopic studies of carbonic acid.
Theoretical calculations show that the presence of even a single molecule of water causes carbonic acid to revert to carbon dioxide and water. In the absence of water, the dissociation of gaseous carbonic acid is predicted to be very slow, with a half-life of 180,000 years. This may only apply to isolated carbonic acid molecules, however, as it has been predicted to catalyze its own decomposition.
The longstanding belief was that pure carbonic acid cannot be obtained at room temperatures (about 20 °C, or about 70 °F) due to its catalytic destruction by water. It has been discovered that it can be generated by exposing a frozen mixture of water and carbon dioxide to high-energy radiation and then warming to remove the excess water. The carbonic acid that remains is characterized by infrared spectroscopy. The fact that the carbonic acid was prepared by irradiating a solid H2O + CO2 mixture may suggest that H2CO3 might be found in outer space, where frozen ices of H2O and CO2 are common, as are cosmic rays and ultraviolet light, to help them react. The same carbonic acid polymorph (denoted "beta"-carbonic acid) was prepared by heating alternating layers of glassy aqueous solutions of bicarbonate and acid in vacuum, which causes protonation of bicarbonate, followed by removal of the solvent. The previously suggested "alpha"-carbonic acid, which was prepared by the same technique using methanol rather than water as a solvent was shown to be a monomethyl ester CH3OCOOH.

</doc>
<doc id="51421" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51421" title="Integer sequence">
Integer sequence

In mathematics, an integer sequence is a sequence (i.e., an ordered list) of integers.
An integer sequence may be specified "explicitly" by giving a formula for its "n"th term, or "implicitly" by giving a relationship between its terms. For example, the sequence 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, … (the Fibonacci sequence) is formed by starting with 0 and 1 and then adding any two consecutive terms to obtain the next one: an implicit description. The sequence 0, 3, 8, 15, … is formed according to the formula "n"2 − 1 for the "n"th term: an explicit definition.
Alternatively, an integer sequence may be defined by a property which members of the sequence possess and other integers do not possess. For example, we can determine whether a given integer is a perfect number, even though we do not have a formula for the "n"th perfect number.
Examples.
Integer sequences which have received their own name include:
Computable and definable sequences.
An integer sequence is a computable sequence, if there exists an algorithm which given "n", calculates "a""n", for all "n" > 0. An integer sequence is a definable sequence, if there exists some statement "P"("x") which is true for that integer sequence "x" and false for all other integer sequences. The set of computable integer sequences and definable integer sequences are both countable, with the computable sequences a proper subset of the definable sequences (in other words, some sequences are definable but not computable). The set of all integer sequences is uncountable (with cardinality equal to that of the continuum); thus, almost all integer sequences are uncomputable and cannot be defined.
Complete sequences.
An integer sequence is called a complete sequence if every positive integer can be expressed as a sum of values in the sequence, using each value at most once.

</doc>
<doc id="51423" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51423" title="P-adic number">
P-adic number

In mathematics the -adic number system for any prime number  extends the ordinary arithmetic of the rational numbers in a way different from the extension of the rational number system to the real and complex number systems. The extension is achieved by an alternative interpretation of the concept of "closeness" or absolute value. In particular, -adic numbers have the interesting property that they are said to be close when their difference is divisible by a high power of – the higher the power the closer they are. This property enables -adic numbers to encode congruence information in a way that turns out to have powerful applications in number theory including, for example, in the famous proof of Fermat's Last Theorem by Andrew Wiles.
-adic numbers were first described by Kurt Hensel in 1897, though, with hindsight, some of Ernst Kummer's earlier work can be interpreted as implicitly using -adic numbers. The -adic numbers were motivated primarily by an attempt to bring the ideas and techniques of power series methods into number theory. Their influence now extends far beyond this. For example, the field of -adic analysis essentially provides an alternative form of calculus.
More formally, for a given prime , the field of -adic numbers is a completion of the rational numbers. The field is also given a topology derived from a metric, which is itself derived from the p-adic order, an alternative valuation on the rational numbers. This metric space is complete in the sense that every Cauchy sequence converges to a point in . This is what allows the development of calculus on , and it is the interaction of this analytic and algebraic structure which gives the -adic number systems their power and utility.
The in "-adic" is a variable and may be replaced with a prime (yielding, for instance, "the 2-adic numbers") or another "placeholder variable" (for expressions such as "the ℓ-adic numbers"). The "adic" of "-adic" comes from the ending found in words such as dyadic or triadic, and the means a prime number. 
Introduction.
"This section is an informal introduction to p-adic numbers, using examples from the ring of 10-adic (decadic) numbers. Although for p-adic numbers p should be a prime, base 10 was chosen to highlight the analogy with decimals. The decadic numbers are generally not used in mathematics: since 10 is not prime, the decadics are not a field. More formal constructions and properties are given below."
In the standard decimal representation, almost all real numbers do not have a terminating decimal representation. For example, 1/3 is represented as a non-terminating decimal as follows
Informally, non-terminating decimals are easily understood, because it is clear that a real number can be approximated to any required degree of precision by a terminating decimal. If two decimal expansions differ only after the 10th decimal place, they are quite close to one another; and if they differ only after the 20th decimal place, they are even closer.
10-adic numbers use a similar non-terminating expansion, but with a different concept of "closeness". Whereas two decimal expansions are close to one another if their difference is a large negative power of 10, two 10-adic expansions are close if their difference is a large positive power of 10. Thus 3333 and 4333, which differ by 103, are close in the 10-adic world, and 33333333 and 43333333 are even closer, differing by 107.
More precisely, a positive rational number  can be expressed as , where and are positive integers and is relatively prime to and to 10. For each there exists the maximal  such that this representation is possible. Let the 10-adic absolute value of  be 
Closeness in any number system is defined by a metric. Using the 10-adic metric the distance between numbers and is given by . An interesting consequence of the 10-adic metric (or of a -adic metric) is that there is no longer a need for the negative sign. As an example, by examining the following sequence we can see how unsigned 10-adics can get progressively closer and closer to the number −1:
and taking this sequence to its limit, we can say that the 10-adic expansion of −1 is
In this notation, 10-adic expansions can be extended indefinitely to the left, in contrast to decimal expansions, which can be extended indefinitely to the right. Note that this is not the only way to write -adic numbers – for alternatives see the "Notation" section below.
More formally, a 10-adic number can be defined as
where each of the "a""i" is a digit taken from the set {0, 1, … , 9} and the initial index may be positive, negative or 0, but must be finite. From this definition, it is clear that positive integers and positive rational numbers with terminating decimal expansions will have terminating 10-adic expansions that are identical to their decimal expansions. Other numbers may have non-terminating 10-adic expansions.
It is possible to define addition, subtraction, and multiplication on 10-adic numbers in a consistent way, so that the 10-adic numbers form a commutative ring.
We can create 10-adic expansions for negative numbers as follows
and fractions which have non-terminating decimal expansions also have non-terminating 10-adic expansions. For example
Generalizing the last example, we can find a 10-adic expansion with no digits to the right of the decimal point for any rational number such that is co-prime to 10; Euler's theorem guarantees that if is co-prime to 10, then there is an such that is a multiple of . The other rational numbers can be expressed as 10-adic numbers with some digits after the decimal point.
As noted above, 10-adic numbers have a major drawback. It is possible to find pairs of non-zero 10-adic numbers (having an infinite number of digits, and thus not rational) whose product is 0. This means that 10-adic numbers do not always have multiplicative inverses i.e. valid reciprocals, which in turn implies that though 10-adic numbers form a ring they do not form a field, a deficiency that makes them much less useful as an analytical tool. Another way of saying this is that the ring of 10-adic numbers is not an integral domain because they contain zero divisors. The reason for this property turns out to be that 10 is a composite number which is not a power of a prime. This problem is simply avoided by using a prime number  as the base of the number system instead of 10 and indeed for this reason in -adic is usually taken to be prime.
"p"-adic expansions.
When dealing with natural numbers, if we take to be a fixed prime number, then any positive integer can be written as a base  expansion in the form
where the "a""i" are integers in {0, … , }. For example, the binary expansion of 35 is 1·25 + 0·24 + 0·23 + 0·22 + 1·21 + 1·20, often written in the shorthand notation 1000112.
The familiar approach to extending this description to the larger domain of the rationals (and, ultimately, to the reals) is to use sums of the form:
A definite meaning is given to these sums based on Cauchy sequences, using the absolute value as metric. Thus, for example, 1/3 can be expressed in base 5 as the limit of the sequence 0.1313131313...5. In this formulation, the integers are precisely those numbers for which "a""i" = 0 for all "i" < 0.
With "p"-adic numbers, on the other hand, we choose to extend the base  expansions in a different way. Unlike traditional integers, where the magnitude is determined by how far they are from zero, the "size" of -adic numbers is determined by the -adic absolute value, where high positive powers of are relatively small compared to high negative powers of . Consider infinite sums of the form:
where "k" is some (not necessarily positive) integer, and each coefficient formula_23 can be called a -adic digit. With this approach we obtain the -adic expansions of the -adic numbers. Those -adic numbers for which "a""i" = 0 for all "i" < 0 are also called the -adic integers.
As opposed to real number expansions which extend to the "right" as sums of ever smaller, increasingly negative powers of the base , -adic numbers may expand to the "left" forever, a property that can often be true for the -adic integers. For example, consider the -adic expansion of 1/3 in base 5. It can be shown to be …1313132, i.e., the limit of the sequence 2, 32, 132, 3132, 13132, 313132, 1313132, … :
Multiplying this infinite sum by 3 in base 5 gives …0000001. As there are no negative powers of 5 in this expansion of 1/3 (i.e. no numbers to the right of the decimal point), we see that 1/3 satisfies the definition of being a -adic integer in base 5.
More formally, the -adic expansions can be used to define the field of -adic numbers while the -adic integers form a subring of , denoted . (Not to be confused with the ring of integers modulo  which is also sometimes written . To avoid ambiguity, or are often used to represent the integers modulo .)
While it is possible to use the approach above to define -adic numbers and explore their properties, just as in the case of real numbers other approaches are generally preferred. Hence we want to define a notion of infinite sum which makes these expressions meaningful, and this is most easily accomplished by the introduction of the -adic metric. Two different but equivalent solutions to this problem are presented in the "Constructions" section below.
Notation.
There are several different conventions for writing -adic expansions. So far this article has used a notation for -adic expansions in which powers of  increase from right to left. With this right-to-left notation the 3-adic expansion of , for example, is written as
When performing arithmetic in this notation, digits are carried to the left. It is also possible to write -adic expansions so that the powers of increase from left to right, and digits are carried to the right. With this left-to-right notation the 3-adic expansion of is
-adic expansions may be written with other sets of digits instead of {0, 1, …, }. For example, the 3-adic expansion of 1/5 can be written using balanced ternary digits {1,0,1} as
In fact any set of integers which are in distinct residue classes modulo may be used as -adic digits. In number theory, Teichmüller representatives are sometimes used as digits.
Constructions.
Analytic approach.
The real numbers can be defined as equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences of rational numbers; this allows us to, for example, write 1 as 1.000… = 0.999… . The definition of a Cauchy sequence relies on the metric chosen, though, so if we choose a different one, we can construct numbers other than the real numbers. The usual metric which yields the real numbers is called the Euclidean metric.
For a given prime , we define the "p-adic absolute value" in as follows:
for any non-zero rational number , there is a unique integer  allowing us to write , where neither of the integers "a" and "b" is divisible by . Unless the numerator or denominator of  in lowest terms contains as a factor, will be 0. Now define . We also define .
For example with <br>
This definition of has the effect that high powers of  become "small".
By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, for a given non-zero rational number "x" there is a unique finite set of distinct primes formula_32 and a corresponding sequence of non-zero integers formula_33 such that:
It then follows that formula_35 for all formula_36, and formula_37 for any other prime formula_38
The -adic absolute value defines a metric d"p" on by setting
The field of -adic numbers can then be defined as the completion of the metric space (, d"p"); its elements are equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences, where two sequences are called equivalent if their difference converges to zero. In this way, we obtain a complete metric space which is also a field and contains .
It can be shown that in , every element "x" may be written in a unique way as
where "k" is some integer such that "a""k" ≠ "0" and each "a""i" is in {0, …,  }. This series converges to "x" with respect to the metric d"p".
With this absolute value, the field is a local field.
Ostrowski's theorem states that each absolute value on is equivalent either to the Euclidean absolute value, the trivial absolute value, or to one of the -adic absolute values for some prime . Each absolute value (or metric) leads to a different completion of . (With the trivial absolute value, is already complete.)
Algebraic approach.
In the algebraic approach, we first define the ring of -adic integers, and then construct the field of fractions of this ring to get the field of -adic numbers.
We start with the inverse limit of the rings
("an")"n"≥1 such that "a""n" is in
, and if "n" ≤ "m", then
"an" ≡ "a""m" (mod "p""n").
Every natural number "m" defines such a sequence ("a""n") by "a""n" = "m" mod "pn" and can therefore be regarded as a -adic integer. For example, in this case 35 as a 2-adic integer would be written as the sequence (1, 3, 3, 3, 3, 35, 35, 35, …).
The operators of the ring amount to pointwise addition and multiplication of such sequences. This is well defined because addition and multiplication commute with the "mod" operator; see modular arithmetic.
Moreover, every sequence ("a""n") where the first element is not 0 has an inverse. In that case, for every "n", "an" and "p" are coprime, and so "an" and "pn" are relatively prime. Therefore, each "an" has an inverse mod "pn", and the sequence of these inverses, ("bn"), is the sought inverse of ("an"). For example, consider the -adic integer corresponding to the natural number 7; as a 2-adic number, it would be written (1, 3, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, ...). This object's inverse would be written as an ever-increasing sequence that begins (1, 3, 7, 7, 23, 55, 55, 183, 439, 439, 1463 ...). Naturally, this 2-adic integer has no corresponding natural number.
Every such sequence can alternatively be written as a series. For instance, in the 3-adics, the sequence (2, 8, 8, 35, 35, ...) can be written as The partial sums of this latter series are the elements of the given sequence.
The ring of -adic integers has no zero divisors, so we can take the field of fractions to get the field of -adic numbers. Note that in this field of fractions, every non-integer -adic number can be uniquely written as with a natural number "n" and a unit in the -adic integers "u". This means that
Note that , where formula_42 is a multiplicative subset (contains the unit and closed under multiplication) of a commutative ring with unit formula_43, is an algebraic construction called the ring of fractions or localization of formula_43 by formula_45.
Properties.
Topology.
Define a topology on by taking as a basis of open sets all sets of the form
where "a" is a non-negative integer and "n" is an integer in "p"a. For example, in the dyadic integers, U1(1) is the set of odd numbers. Ua("n") is the set of all "p"-adic integers whose difference from "n" has "p"-adic absolute value less than "p"1−a. Then is a compactification of , under the derived topology (it is "not" a compactification of with its usual discrete topology). The relative topology on as a subset of is called the -adic topology on .
The topology of is that of a Cantor set formula_46. For instance, we can make a continuous 1-to-1 mapping between the dyadic integers and the Cantor set expressed in base 3 by mapping
formula_47
in to
formula_48
in formula_46, where
formula_50.
Using a different mapping, in which the integers go to just part of the Cantor set, one can show that the topology of is that of a Cantor set minus a point (such as the right-most point). In particular, is compact while is not; it is only locally compact. As metric spaces, both and are complete.
Metric completions and algebraic closures.
If is a finite Galois extension of , the Galois group is solvable. Thus, the Galois group is prosolvable.
Multiplicative group of.
Given a natural number , the index of the multiplicative group of the -th powers of the non-zero elements of in is finite.
The number e (mathematical constant), defined as the sum of reciprocals of factorials, is not a member of any -adic field; but . For one must take at least the fourth power. (Thus a number with similar properties as – namely a -th root of – is a member of for all .)
Analysis on.
The only real functions whose derivative is zero are the constant functions. This is not true over . For instance, the function
has zero derivative everywhere but is not even locally constant at .
If we let be denoted , then given any elements where , it is possible to find a sequence in such that for all (including ), the limit of in is .
Rational arithmetic.
Eric Hehner and Nigel Horspool proposed in 1979 the use of a -adic representation for rational numbers on computers called Quote notation. The primary advantage of such a representation is that addition, subtraction, and multiplication can be done in a straightforward manner analogous to similar methods for binary integers; and division is even simpler, resembling multiplication. However, it has the disadvantage that representations can be much larger than simply storing the numerator and denominator in binary; for example, if is a Mersenne prime, its reciprocal will require bits to represent.
Generalizations and related concepts.
The reals and the -adic numbers are the completions of the rationals; it is also possible to complete other fields, for instance general algebraic number fields, in an analogous way. This will be described now.
Suppose "D" is a Dedekind domain and "E" is its field of fractions. Pick a non-zero prime ideal "P" of "D". If "x" is a non-zero element of "E", then "xD" is a fractional ideal and can be uniquely factored as a product of positive and negative powers of non-zero prime ideals of "D". We write ord"P"("x") for the exponent of "P" in this factorization, and for any choice of number "c" greater than 1 we can set
Completing with respect to this absolute value |.|"P" yields a field "E""P", the proper generalization of the field of "p"-adic numbers to this setting. The choice of "c" does not change the completion (different choices yield the same concept of Cauchy sequence, so the same completion). It is convenient, when the residue field "D"/"P" is finite, to take for "c" the size of "D"/"P".
For example, when "E" is a number field, Ostrowski's theorem says that every non-trivial non-Archimedean absolute value on "E" arises as some |.|"P". The remaining non-trivial absolute values on "E" arise from the different embeddings of "E" into the real or complex numbers. (In fact, the non-Archimedean absolute values can be considered as simply the different embeddings of "E" into the fields C"p", thus putting the description of all
the non-trivial absolute values of a number field on a common footing.)
Often, one needs to simultaneously keep track of all the above-mentioned completions when "E" is a number field (or more generally a global field), which are seen as encoding "local" information. This is accomplished by adele rings and idele groups.
Local–global principle.
Helmut Hasse's local–global principle is said to hold for an equation if it can be solved over the rational numbers if and only if it can be solved over the real numbers and over the -adic numbers for every prime . This principle holds e.g. for equations given by quadratic forms, but fails for higher polynomials in several indeterminates.

</doc>
<doc id="51425" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51425" title="Somaliland">
Somaliland

Somaliland (, ' or '), officially the Republic of Somaliland (, "Jumhūrīyat Ṣūmālīlānd)", is a self-declared state internationally recognized as an autonomous region of Somalia. The government of Somaliland regards itself as the successor state to the former British Somaliland protectorate, which as the State of Somaliland united as scheduled on 1 July 1960 with the Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somaliland) to form the Somali Republic (Somalia).
Somaliland lies in northwestern Somalia, on the southern coast of the Gulf of Aden. It is bordered by the autonomous region of the Puntland State of Somalia to the east, Djibouti to the northwest, and Ethiopia to the south and west. Its claimed territory has an area of , with approximately 4 million residents. The capital and the largest city is Hargeisa, with the population of around 1,200,000 residents.
In 1988, the Siad Barre regime launched a crackdown against the Hargeisa-based Somali National Movement (SNM) and other militant groups, which were among the events that led to the Somali Civil War. The conflict left the country's economic and military infrastructure severely damaged. Following the collapse of Barre's government in early 1991, local authorities, led by the SNM, declared independence from Somalia on 18 May of the same year and reinstated the borders of the former short-lived independent State of Somaliland.
Since then, the territory has been governed by democratically elected governments that seek international recognition as the Government of the Republic of Somaliland (, "Dawlat Jumhūrīyat Ṣūmālīlānd)". The central government maintains informal ties with some foreign governments, who have sent delegations to Hargeisa. Ethiopia also maintains a trade office in the region. However, Somaliland's self-proclaimed independence remains unrecognised by any country or international organisation. It is a member of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, whose members consist of indigenous peoples, minorities, and unrecognised or occupied territories.
History.
The earliest human artifacts in the area are the Laas Geel cave paintings, dating from before 3000 BC. The region is sometimes thought to be part of the Land of Punt. Islam was introduced to the northern Somali littoral early on from the Arabian peninsula, shortly after the hijra. Various Muslim Somali kingdoms were formed around this period in the area. In the 14th century, Somaliland became a battleground between the Harla people and the forces of Ethiopian emperor Amda Seyon I. In the 1500s, the Ottoman Empire occupied Berbera and environs. Muhammad Ali, Pasha of Egypt, subsequently established a foothold in the area between 1821 and 1841.
In 1888, after signing successive treaties with the then ruling Somali Sultans such as Mohamoud Ali Shire of the Warsangali Sultanate, the British established a protectorate in the region referred to as British Somaliland. The British garrisoned the protectorate from Aden and administered it as part of British India until 1898. British Somaliland was then administered by the Foreign Office until 1905, and afterwards by the Colonial Office.
Generally, the British did not have much interest in the resource-barren region. The stated purposes of the establishment of the protectorate were to "secure a supply market, check the traffic in slaves, and to exclude the interference of foreign powers." The British principally viewed the protectorate as a source for supplies of meat for their British Indian outpost in Aden through the maintenance of order in the coastal areas and protection of the caravan routes from the interior. Hence, the region's nickname of "Aden's butcher's shop". Colonial administration during this period did not extend administrative infrastructure beyond the coast, and contrasted with the more interventionist colonial experience of Italian Somaliland.
On 1 July 1960, the protectorate and the Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somaliland) united as planned to form the Somali Republic. A government was formed by Abdullahi Issa, with Aden Abdullah Osman Daar as President and Abdirashid Ali Shermarke as Prime Minister (later to become President, from 1967 to 1969). On 20 July 1961 and through a popular referendum, the Somali people ratified a new constitution, which was first drafted in 1960. In 1967, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister, a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke. Shermarke would be assassinated two years later by one of his own bodyguards. His murder was quickly followed by a military coup d'état on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somalian Army seized power without encountering armed opposition. The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army. The new regime would go on to rule Somalia for the next 21 years.
The moral authority of Barre's government gradually eroded, as many Somalis had become disillusioned with life under military rule. By the mid-1980s, resistance movements supported by Ethiopia's communist Derg administration had sprung up across the country. Barre responded by ordering punitive measures against those he perceived as locally supporting the guerillas, especially in the northern regions. The clampdown included bombing of cities, with the northwestern administrative center of Hargeisa, a Somali National Movement (SNM) stronghold, among the targeted areas in 1988. The bombardment was led by General Mohammed Said Hersi Morgan, Barre's son-in-law.
Although the SNM at its inception had a unionist constitution, it eventually began to pursue independence, looking to secede from the rest of Somalia. Under the leadership of Abdirahman Ahmed Ali Tuur, the local administration declared the northwestern Somali territories independent at a conference held in Burao between 27 April 1991 and 15 May 1991. Tuur then became the newly established Somaliland polity's first President, but subsequently renounced the separatist platform in 1994 and began instead to publicly seek and advocate reconciliation with the rest of Somalia under a power-sharing federal system of governance. Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal was appointed as Tuur's successor in 1993 by the Grand Conference of National Reconciliation in Borama, which met for four months, leading to a gradual improvement in security, as well as a consolidation of the new territory. Egal was reappointed in 1997, and remained in power until his death on 3 May 2002. The vice president, Dahir Riyale Kahin, who was during the 1980s the highest-ranking National Security Service (NSS) officer in Berbera in Siad Barre's government, was sworn in as president shortly afterwards. In 2003, Kahin became the first elected president of Somaliland.
The war in southern Somalia between Islamist insurgents on the one hand, and the Federal Government of Somalia and its African Union allies on the other, has for the most part not directly affected Somaliland, which, like neighboring Puntland, has remained relatively stable.
Politics and government.
Under the Federal Constitution of Somalia, Somaliland is not officially a Federal Member State of the Federal Republic of Somalia. It has a hybrid system of governance under the Constitution of Somaliland, combining traditional and western institutions. In a series of inter-clan conferences, culminating in the Boorama Conference in 1993, a "qabil" (clan or community) system of government was constructed. The constitution separates government into an executive branch, a legislative branch, and a judicial branch, each of which functions independently from the others.
The "guurti" worked with rebel leaders to set up a new government, and was incorporated into the governance structure, becoming the Parliament's House of Elders. The government became in essence a "power-sharing coalition of Somaliland's main clans," with seats in the Upper and Lower houses proportionally allocated to clans according to a predetermined formula, although not all clans are satisfied with their representation. In 2002, after several extensions of this interim government, Somaliland transitioned to multi-party democracy. The election was limited to three parties, in an attempt to create ideology based elections rather than clan based elections.
The Executive is led by an elected president, whose government includes a vice-president and a Council of Ministers. The Council of Ministers, who are responsible for the normal running of government, are nominated by the President and approved by the Parliament's House of Representatives. The President must approve bills passed by the Parliament before they come into effect. Presidential elections are confirmed by the National Elections Commission. The President can serve a maximum of two five-year terms.
Legislative power is held by the bicameral Parliament. Its upper house is the House of Elders, and the lower house is the House of Representatives. The lower house is chaired by Abdirahman Mohamed Abdullahi. Each house has 82 members. Members of the House of Elders are elected indirectly by local communities for six-year terms. The House of Elders shares power in passing laws with the House of Representatives, and also has the role of solving internal conflicts, and an exclusive power to extend the terms of the President and representatives under circumstances that make an election impossible. Members of the House of Representatives are directly elected by the people for five-year terms. The House of Representatives shares voting power with the House of Elders, though it can pass a law that the House of Elders rejects if it votes for the law by a 2/3's majority, and has absolute power in financial matters and confirmation of Presidential appointments (except for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court). However, the Parliament provides weak oversight of the executive branch.
The judicial system is divided into district courts, (which deal with matters of family law and succession, lawsuits for amounts up to 3 million SL, criminal cases punishable by up to 3 years imprisonment or 3 million SL fines, and crimes committed by juveniles), regional courts (which deal with lawsuits and criminal cases not within the jurisdiction of district courts, labour and employment claims, and local government elections), regional appeals courts (which deal with all appeals from district and regional courts), and the Supreme Court (which deals with issues between courts and in government, and reviews its own decisions), which is the highest court and also functions as the Constitutional Court.
As of December 2014, Somaliland has three political parties: the Peace, Unity, and Development Party, the Justice and Development Party, and Wadani. Under the Somaliland Constitution, a maximum of three political parties is allowed, and parties defined by religion or clan are prohibited, though all official parties are closely affiliated with a clan.
Foreign relations.
Somaliland has political contacts with its neighbours Ethiopia and Djibouti, as well as with South Africa, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. On 17 January 2007, the European Union (EU) sent a delegation for foreign affairs to discuss future cooperation. The African Union (AU) has also sent a foreign minister to discuss the future of international acknowledgment, and on 29 and 30 January 2007, the ministers stated that they would discuss acknowledgement with the organisation's member states.
In early 2006, the National Assembly of Wales extended an official invitation to the Somaliland government to attend the royal opening of the Senedd in Cardiff. The move was seen as an act of recognition by the Welsh Assembly of the breakaway government's legitimacy. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office made no comment on the invitation. Wales is home to a significant Somali expatriate community from Somaliland.
In 2007, a delegation led by President Kahin was present at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kampala, Uganda. Although Somaliland has applied to join the Commonwealth under observer status, its application is still pending.
On 24 September 2010, Johnnie Carson, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, stated that the United States would be modifying its strategy in Somalia and would seek deeper engagement with the governments of Somaliland and Puntland while continuing to support the Somali Transitional Government. Carson said the US would send aid workers and diplomats to Puntland and Somaliland and alluded to the possibility of future development projects. However, Carson emphasized that the U.S. would not extend formal recognition to either region.
The then UK Minister for Africa, Henry Bellingham MP, met President Silanyo of Somaliland in November 2010 to discuss ways in which to increase the UK's engagement with Somaliland. President Silanyo said during his visit to London: "We have been working with the international community and the international community has been engaging with us, giving us assistance and working with us in our democratisation and development programmes. And we are very happy with the way the international community has been dealing with us, particularly the UK, the US, other European nations and our neighbours who continue to seek recognition." Recognition of Somaliland by the UK has also been supported by the UK Independence Party, which came 3rd in the popular vote at the 2015 General Election. The leader of UKIP, Nigel Farage, met with Ali Aden Awale, Head of the Somaliland UK Mission on Somaliland's national day, May 18, in 2015, to express UKIP's support for Somaliland. Nigel Farage said that "Somaliland has been a beacon of peace, democracy and the Rule of Law, in the Horn of Africa for the past 24 years. It is about time the UK and the rest of the international community recognised Somaliland's case for recognition. It's about time peace was rewarded. For the UK to turn its back on their legitimate demands for sovereignty, is wrong. It is extraordinary that we have not been lobbying for their admittance to the Commonwealth. In recent years we have supported the admission of countries such as Mozambique which have no historic links to Britain, but Somaliland, a former protectorate is left in the cold. This must change".
In 2011, Somaliland and the neighbouring Puntland region each entered a security-related memorandum of understanding with the Seychelles. Following the framework of an earlier agreement signed between the Transitional Federal Government and the Seychelles, the memorandum is "for the transfer of convicted persons to prisons in 'Puntland' and 'Somaliland'".
Border disputes.
Somaliland continues to claim the entire area of the former British Somaliland. It is currently in control of the western half of the former British Somaliland, with northeastern Maakhir having declared itself a separate, unrecognised autonomous state within Somalia in July 2007, and the disputed southeastern Sool state had been under the control of neighbouring Puntland. A coalition of Gadabuursi intellectuals hailing from the westernmost Awdal province have threatened to secede if Somaliland's independence is recognised.
Tensions between Puntland and Somaliland escalated into violence several times between 2002 and 2009. In October 2004, and again in April and October 2007, armed forces of Somaliland and Puntland clashed near the town of Las Anod, the capital of Sool region. In October 2007, Somaliland troops took control of the town. While celebrating Puntland's 11th anniversary on 2 August 2009, Puntland officials vowed to recapture Las Anod. While Somaliland claims independent statehood and therefore "split up" the "old" Somalia, Puntland works for the re-establishment of a united but federal Somali state.
Somaliland forces took control of the town of Las Qorey in eastern Sanaag on 10 July 2008, along with positions five kilometers east of the town. The defence forces completed their operations on 9 July 2008 after the Maakhir and Puntland militia in the area left their positions, but control of the territory was later assumed by Puntland as Maakhir was incorporated into the autonomous region in January 2009.
In the late 2000s, HBM-SSC (Hoggaanka Badbaadada iyo Mideynta SSC), a local unionist group based in Sanaag was formed with the goal to establish its own regional administration (Sool, Sanaag and Cayn, or SSC). This later evolved into Khatumo State, which was established in 2012. The local administration and its constituents does not recognise the Somaliland government's claim to sovereignty or to its territory.
In 2010, the formation of a new autonomous region within a federal Somalia was also declared in the Awdal province. Referred to as Awdalland or the "Awdal State", the local administration and the region's residents do not recognise the Somaliland government's claim to sovereignty or to their territory.
Military.
The Somaliland Armed Forces are the main military command in Somaliland. Along with the Police Force and all other internal security forces, they are overseen by Somaliland's Ministry of Defence. The current head of Somaliland's Armed Forces is the Minister of Defence, Mudane Ahmed Haj Adami.
The Somaliland Army consists of twelve divisions equipped primarily with light weaponry, though it is equipped with some howitzers and mobile rocket launchers. Its armored vehicles and tanks are mostly of Soviet design, though there are some aging Western vehicles and tanks in its arsenal. The Somaliland Navy (often referred to as a Coast Guard by the Associated Press), despite a crippling lack of equipment and formal training, has apparently had some success at curbing both piracy and illegal fishing within Somaliland waters.

</doc>
<doc id="51426" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51426" title="Cantor's diagonal argument">
Cantor's diagonal argument

In set theory, Cantor's diagonal argument, also called the diagonalisation argument, the diagonal slash argument or the diagonal method, was published in 1891 by Georg Cantor as a mathematical proof that there are infinite sets which cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the infinite set of natural numbers.
Such sets are now known as uncountable sets, and the size of infinite sets is now treated by the theory of cardinal numbers which Cantor began.
The diagonal argument was not Cantor's first proof of the uncountability of the real numbers; it was actually published much later than his first proof, which appeared in 1874.
However, it demonstrates a powerful and general technique that has since been used in a wide range of proofs, including Russell's paradox, the first of Gödel's incompleteness theorems, and Turing's answer to the "Entscheidungsproblem".
Historically, the diagonal argument first appeared in the work of Paul du Bois-Reymond in 1875.
Uncountable set.
In his 1891 article, Cantor considered the set "T" of all infinite sequences of binary digits (i.e. consisting only of zeroes and ones).
He begins with a constructive proof of the following theorem:
To prove this, given an enumeration of elements from "T", like e.g.
he constructs the sequence "s" by choosing the 1st digit as complementary to the 1st digit of "s""1" (swapping 0s for 1s and vice versa), the 2nd digit as complementary to the 2nd digit of "s""2", the 3rd digit as complementary to the 3rd digit of "s""3", and generally for every "n", the "n"th digit as complementary to the "n"th digit of "s""n". In the example, this yields:
By construction, "s" differs from each "s""n", since their "n"th digits differ (highlighted in the example).
Hence, "s" cannot occur in the enumeration.
Based on this theorem, Cantor then uses an indirect argument to show that:
He assumes for contradiction that "T" was countable.
Then all its elements could be written as an enumeration "s"1, "s"2, … , "s""n", … .
Applying the previous theorem to this enumeration would produce a sequence "s" not belonging to the enumeration.
However, "s" was an element of "T" and should therefore be in the enumeration. 
This contradicts the original assumption, so "T" must be uncountable.
Interpretation.
The interpretation of Cantor's result will depend upon one's view of mathematics. To constructivists, the argument shows no more than that there is no bijection between the natural numbers and "T". It does not rule out the possibility that the latter are subcountable. In the context of classical mathematics, this is impossible, and the diagonal argument establishes that, although both sets are infinite, there are actually "more" infinite sequences of ones and zeros than there are natural numbers.
Real numbers.
The uncountability of the real numbers was already established by Cantor's first uncountability proof, but it also follows from the above result. To see this, we will build a one-to-one correspondence between the set "T" of infinite binary strings and a subset of R (the set of real numbers). Since "T" is uncountable, this subset of R must be uncountable. Hence R is uncountable.
To build this one-to-one correspondence (or bijection), observe that the string "t" = 0111… appears after the binary point in the binary expansion 0.0111…. This suggests defining the function "f"("t") = 0."t", where "t" is a string in "T". Unfortunately, "f"(1000…) = 0.1000… = 1/2, and "f"(0111…) = 0.0111… = 1/4 + 1/8 + 1/16 + … = 1/2. So this function is not a bijection since two strings correspond to one number—a number having two binary expansions.
However, modifying this function produces a bijection from "T" to the interval (0, 1)—that is, the real numbers > 0 and < 1. The idea is to remove the "problem" elements from "T" and (0, 1), and handle them separately. From (0, 1), remove the numbers having two binary expansions. Put these numbers in a sequence: "a" = (1/2, 1/4, 3/4, 1/8, 3/8, 5/8, 7/8, …). From "T", remove the strings appearing after the binary point in the binary expansions of 0, 1, and the numbers in sequence "a". Put these eventually-constant strings in a sequence: "b" = (…, …, 1…, 0…, 01…, 00…, 11…, 10…, ...). A bijection "g"("t") from "T" to (0, 1) is defined by: If "t" is the "n"th string in sequence "b", let "g"("t") be the "n"th number in sequence "a"; otherwise, let "g"("t") = 0."t".
To build a bijection from "T" to R: start with the tangent function tan("x"), which provides a bijection from (−π/2, π/2) to R; see right picture. Next observe that the linear function "h"("x") = π"x" - π/2 provides a bijection from (0, 1) to (−π/2, π/2); see left picture. The composite function tan("h"("x")) = tan(π"x" - π/2) provides a bijection from (0, 1) to R. Compose this function with "g"("t") to obtain tan("h"("g"("t"))) = tan(π"g"("t") - π/2), which is a bijection from "T" to R. This means that "T" and R have the same cardinality—this cardinality is called the "cardinality of the continuum."
General sets.
A generalized form of the diagonal argument was used by Cantor to prove Cantor's theorem: for every set "S" the power set of "S"; that is, the set of all subsets of "S" (here written as P("S")), has a larger cardinality than "S" itself. This proof proceeds as follows:
Let "f" be any function from "S" to P("S"). It suffices to prove "f" cannot be surjective. That means that some member "T" of P("S"), i.e. some subset of "S", is not in the image of "f". As a candidate consider the set:
For every "s" in "S", either "s" is in "T" or not. If "s" is in "T", then by definition of "T", "s" is not in "f"("s"), so "T" is not equal to "f"("s"). On the other hand, if "s" is not in "T", then by definition of "T", "s" is in "f"("s"), so again "T" is not equal to "f"("s"); cf. picture.
For a more complete account of this proof, see Cantor's theorem.
Consequences.
This result implies that the notion of the set of all sets is an inconsistent notion. If "S" were the set of all sets then P("S") would at the same time be bigger than "S" and a subset of "S".
Russell's Paradox has shown us that naive set theory, based on an unrestricted comprehension scheme, is contradictory. Note that there is a similarity between the construction of "T" and the set in Russell's paradox. Therefore, depending on how we modify the axiom scheme of comprehension in order to avoid Russell's paradox, arguments such as the non-existence of a set of all sets may or may not remain valid.
The diagonal argument shows that the set of real numbers is "bigger" than the set of natural numbers (and therefore, the integers and rationals as well). Therefore, we can ask if there is a set whose cardinality is "between" that of the integers and that of the reals. This question leads to the famous continuum hypothesis. Similarly, the question of whether there exists a set whose cardinality is between |"S"| and |P("S")| for some infinite "S" leads to the generalized continuum hypothesis.
Analogues of the diagonal argument are widely used in mathematics to prove the existence or nonexistence of certain objects. For example, the conventional proof of the unsolvability of the halting problem is essentially a diagonal argument. Also, diagonalization was originally used to show the existence of arbitrarily hard complexity classes and played a key role in early attempts to prove P does not equal NP.
Version for Quine's New Foundations.
The above proof fails for W. V. Quine's "New Foundations" set theory (NF). In NF, the naive axiom scheme of comprehension is modified to avoid the paradoxes by introducing a kind of "local" type theory. In this axiom scheme,
is "not" a set — i.e., does not satisfy the axiom scheme. On the other hand, we might try to create a modified diagonal argument by noticing that
"is" a set in NF. In which case, if P1("S") is the set of one-element subsets of "S" and "f" is a proposed bijection from P1("S") to P("S"), one is able to use proof by contradiction to prove that |P1("S")| < |P("S")|.
The proof follows by the fact that if "f" were indeed a map "onto" P("S"), then we could find "r" in "S", such that "f"({"r"}) coincides with the modified diagonal set, above. We would conclude that if "r" is not in "f"({"r"}), then "r" is in "f"({"r"}) and vice versa.
It is "not" possible to put P1("S") in a one-to-one relation with "S", as the two have different types, and so any function so defined would violate the typing rules for the comprehension scheme.

</doc>
<doc id="51427" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51427" title="British Somaliland">
British Somaliland

British Somaliland (or more fully, British Somaliland Protectorate) (, ) was a British protectorate in present-day Somaliland. For much of its existence, the territory was bordered by Italian Somaliland, French Somaliland and Ethiopia. From 1940 to 1941, it was occupied by the Italians and was part of Italian East Africa. On 1 July 1960, the British Somaliland protectorate united as scheduled with the Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somaliland) to form the Somali Republic (Somalia). The government of Somaliland, a self-declared sovereign state that is internationally recognised as an autonomous region of Somalia, regards itself as the successor state to British Somaliland.
History.
Treaties and establishment.
In 1888, after signing successive treaties with the then ruling Somali Sultans such as Mohamoud Ali Shire of the Warsangali Sultanate, the British established a protectorate in the region referred to as British Somaliland. The British garrisoned the protectorate from Aden and administered it from their British India colony until 1898. British Somaliland was then administered by the Foreign Office until 1905 and afterwards by the Colonial Office.
Generally, the British did not have much interest in the resource-barren region. The stated purposes of the establishment of the protectorate were to "secure a supply market, check the traffic in slaves, and to exclude the interference of foreign powers." The British principally viewed the protectorate as a source for supplies of meat for their British Indian outpost in Aden through the maintenance of order in the coastal areas and protection of the caravan routes from the interior. Hence, the region's nickname of "Aden's butcher's shop". Colonial administration during this period did not extend administrative infrastructure beyond the coast, and contrasted with the more interventionist colonial experience of Italian Somaliland.
Dervish State.
Beginning in 1899, the British were forced to expend considerable human and military capital to contain a decades-long resistance movement mounted by the Dervish State. The polity was led by Sayyid Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, a Somali religious leader referred to colloquially by the British as the "Mad Mullah". Repeated military expeditions were unsuccessfully launched against Hassan and his Dervishes before World War I.
On 9 August 1913, the Somali Camel Constabulary suffered a serious defeat at the Battle of Dul Madoba at the hands of the Dervishes. Hassan had already evaded several attempts to capture him. At Dul Madoba, his forces killed or wounded 57 members of the 110-man Constabulary unit, including the British commander, Colonel Richard Corfield.
In 1914, the British created the Somaliland Camel Corps to assist in maintaining order in British Somaliland.
In 1920, the British launched their fifth and final expedition against Hassan and his followers. Employing the then-new technology of military aircraft, the British finally managed to quell Hassan's twenty-year-long struggle. The aerial attack on the Dervish capital, Taleh, killed many members of Hassan's family who had been lured there by the British for an official visit. Hassan and his Dervish supporters fled into the Ogaden, where Hassan died in 1921.
Somaliland Camel Corps.
The Somaliland Camel Corps, also referred to as the Somali Camel Corps, was a unit of the British Army based in British Somaliland. It lasted from the early 20th century until 1944. The troopers of the Somali Camel Corps had a distinctive dress. It was based on the standard British Army khaki drill, but included a knitted woollen pullover and drill patches on the shoulders. Shorts were worn with woollen socks on puttees and "chaplis", boots or bare feet. Equipment consisted of a leather ammunition bandolier and a leather waist belt. The officers wore pith helmets and khaki drill uniforms. Other ranks wore a "kullah" with "puggree" which ended in a long tail which hung down the back. A "chaplis" is typically a colourful sandal. A "kullah" is a type of cap. A "puggree" is typically a strip of cloth wound around the upper portion of a hat or helmet, particularly a pith helmet, and falling down behind to act as a shade for the back of the neck.
British Somaliland 1920–1930.
Following the defeat of the Dervish resistance, the two fundamental goals of British policy in British Somaliland were the preservation of stability and the economic self-sufficiency of the protectorate. The second goal remained particularly elusive because of local resistance to taxation that might have been used to support the protectorate's administration. By the 1930s, the British presence had extended to other parts of British Somaliland. Growth in commercial trade motivated some livestock herders to subsequently leave the pastoral economy and settle in urban areas. Customs taxes also helped pay for British India's patrol of Somalia's Red Sea Coast.
Italian invasion.
In August 1940, during the East African Campaign in World War II, British Somaliland was briefly occupied by Italy. During this period, the British rounded up soldiers and governmental officials to evacuate them from the territory through the capital of Berbera. In total, 7,000 people, including civilians, were evacuated. The Somalis serving in the Somaliland Camel Corps were given the choice of evacuation or disbandment; the majority chose to remain and were allowed to retain their arms.
In March 1941, after a six-month Italian occupation, the British Imperial forces recaptured the protectorate during Operation Appearance. The final remnants of the Italian guerrilla movement discontinued all resistance in British Somaliland by the fall of 1943.
Independence and union with the Trust Territory of Somaliland.
In 1947, the entire budget for the administration of the British Somaliland protectorate was only £213,139.
In May 1960, the British Government stated that it would be prepared to grant independence to the then protectorate of British Somaliland, with the intention that the territory would unite with the Italian-administered Trust Territory of Somaliland (the former Italian Somaliland). The Legislative Council of British Somaliland passed a resolution in April 1960 requesting independence and union with the Trust Territory of Somaliland, which was scheduled to gain independence on 1 July that year. The legislative councils of both territories agreed to this proposal following a joint conference in Mogadishu.
On 26 June 1960, the British Somaliland protectorate briefly gained independence as the State of Somaliland before uniting five days later with the Trust Territory of Somaliland to form the Somali Republic on 1 July 1960.
Somaliland.
In 1991, after the breakdown of the central government of the Somali Republic, parts of the area which formerly encompassed British Somaliland declared independence. In May 1991, the formation of the "Republic of Somaliland" was proclaimed, with the local government regarding it as the successor to the former British Somaliland as well as to the State of Somaliland. However, the Somaliland region's self-declared independence remains unrecognised by any country or international organisation.

</doc>
<doc id="51429" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51429" title="Hyperreal number">
Hyperreal number

The system of hyperreal numbers is a way of treating infinite and infinitesimal quantities. The hyperreals, or nonstandard reals, *R, are an extension of the real numbers R that contains numbers greater than anything of the form
Such a number is infinite, and its reciprocal is infinitesimal. The term "hyper-real" was introduced by Edwin Hewitt in 1948.
The hyperreal numbers satisfy the transfer principle, a rigorous version of Leibniz's heuristic Law of Continuity. The transfer principle states that true first order statements about R are also valid in *R. For example, the commutative law of addition, "x" + "y" = "y" + "x", holds for the hyperreals just as it does for the reals; since R is a real closed field, so is *R. Since formula_2 for all integers "n", one also has formula_3 for all hyperintegers "H". The transfer principle for ultrapowers is a consequence of Łoś' theorem of 1955.
Concerns about the soundness of arguments involving infinitesimals date back to ancient Greek mathematics, with Archimedes replacing such proofs with ones using other techniques such as the method of exhaustion. In the 1960s, Abraham Robinson proved that the hyperreals were logically consistent if and only if the reals were. This put to rest the fear that any proof involving infinitesimals might be unsound, provided that they were manipulated according to the logical rules that Robinson delineated.
The application of hyperreal numbers and in particular the transfer principle to problems of analysis is called non-standard analysis. One immediate application is the definition of the basic concepts of analysis such as derivative and integral in a direct fashion, without passing via logical complications of multiple quantifiers. Thus, the derivative of "f(x)" becomes formula_4 for an infinitesimal formula_5, where "st(·)" denotes the standard part function, which "rounds off" each finite hyperreal to the nearest real. Similarly, the integral is defined as the standard part of a suitable infinite sum.
The transfer principle.
The idea of the hyperreal system is to extend the real numbers R to form a system *R that includes infinitesimal and infinite numbers, but without changing any of the elementary axioms of algebra. Any statement of the form "for any number x..." that is true for the reals is also true for the hyperreals. For example, the axiom that states "for any number "x", "x" + 0 = "x"" still applies. The same is true for quantification over several numbers, e.g., "for any numbers "x" and "y", "xy" = "yx"." This ability to carry over statements from the reals to the hyperreals is called the transfer principle. However, statements of the form "for any "set" of numbers S ..." may not carry over. The only properties that differ between the reals and the hyperreals are those that rely on quantification over sets, or other higher-level structures such as functions and relations, which are typically constructed out of sets. Each real set, function, and relation has its natural hyperreal extension, satisfying the same first-order properties. The kinds of logical sentences that obey this restriction on quantification are referred to as statements in first-order logic.
The transfer principle, however, doesn't mean that R and *R have identical behavior. For instance, in *R there exists an element "ω" such that
but there is no such number in R. (In other words, *R is not Archimedean.) This is possible because the nonexistence of "ω" cannot be expressed as a first order statement.
Use in analysis.
Calculus with algebraic functions.
Informal notations for non-real quantities have historically appeared in calculus in two contexts: as infinitesimals like "dx" and as the symbol ∞, used, for example, in limits of integration of improper integrals.
As an example of the transfer principle, the statement that for any nonzero number "x", "2x" ≠ "x", is true for the real numbers, and it is in the form required by the transfer principle, so it is also true for the hyperreal numbers. This shows that it is not possible to use a generic symbol such as ∞ for all the infinite quantities in the hyperreal system; infinite quantities differ in magnitude from other infinite quantities, and infinitesimals from other infinitesimals.
Similarly, the casual use of 1/0 = ∞ is invalid, since the transfer principle applies to the statement that division by zero is undefined. The rigorous counterpart of such a calculation would be that if ε is a non-zero infinitesimal, then 1/ε is infinite.
For any finite hyperreal number "x", its standard part, st "x", is defined as the unique real number that differs from it only infinitesimally. The derivative of a function "y"("x") is defined not as "dy/dx" but as the standard part of "dy/dx".
For example, to find the derivative "f′"("x") of the function "f"("x") = "x"2, let "dx" be a non-zero infinitesimal. Then,
The use of the standard part in the definition of the derivative is a rigorous alternative to the traditional practice of neglecting the square of an infinitesimal quantity. After the third line of the differentiation above, the typical method from Newton through the 19th century would have been simply to discard the "dx"2 term. In the hyperreal system,
"dx"2 ≠ 0, since "dx" is nonzero, and the transfer principle can be applied to the statement that the square of any nonzero number is nonzero. However, the quantity "dx"2 is infinitesimally small compared to "dx"; that is, the hyperreal system contains a hierarchy of infinitesimal quantities.
Integration.
One way of defining a definite integral in the hyperreal system is as the standard part of an infinite sum on a hyperfinite lattice defined as "a", "a + dx", "a + 2dx", ... "a + ndx", where "dx" is infinitesimal, n is an infinite hypernatural, and the lower and upper bounds of integration are "a" and "b" = "a" + "n" "dx."
Properties.
The hyperreals *R form an ordered field containing the reals R as a subfield. Unlike the reals, the hyperreals do not form a standard metric space, but by virtue of their order they carry an order topology.
The use of the definite article "the" in the phrase "the hyperreal numbers" is somewhat misleading in that there is not a unique ordered field that is referred to in most treatments.
However, a 2003 paper by Vladimir Kanovei and Shelah shows that there is a definable, countably saturated (meaning ω-saturated, but not of course countable) elementary extension of the reals, which therefore has a good claim to the title of "the" hyperreal numbers. Furthermore, the field obtained by the ultrapower construction from the space of all real sequences, is unique up to isomorphism if one assumes the continuum hypothesis.
The condition of being a hyperreal field is a stronger one than that of being a real closed field strictly containing R. It is also stronger than that of being a superreal field in the sense of Dales and Woodin.
Development.
The hyperreals can be developed either axiomatically or by more constructively oriented methods. The essence of the axiomatic approach is to assert (1) the existence of at least one infinitesimal number, and (2) the validity of the transfer principle. In the following subsection we give a detailed outline of a more constructive approach. This method allows one to construct the hyperreals if given a set-theoretic object called an ultrafilter, but the ultrafilter itself cannot be explicitly constructed.
From Leibniz to Robinson.
When Newton and (more explicitly) Leibniz introduced differentials, they used infinitesimals and these were still regarded as useful by later mathematicians such as Euler and Cauchy. Nonetheless these concepts were from the beginning seen as suspect, notably by George Berkeley. Berkeley's criticism centered on a perceived shift in hypothesis in the definition of the derivative in terms of infinitesimals (or fluxions), where "dx" is assumed to be nonzero at the beginning of the calculation, and to vanish at its conclusion (see Ghosts of departed quantities for details). When in the 1800s calculus was put on a firm footing through the development of the (ε, δ)-definition of limit by Bolzano, Cauchy, Weierstrass, and others, infinitesimals were largely abandoned, though research in non-Archimedean fields continued (Ehrlich 2006).
However, in the 1960s Abraham Robinson showed how infinitely large and infinitesimal numbers can be rigorously defined and used to develop the field of non-standard analysis. Robinson developed his theory nonconstructively, using model theory; however it is possible to proceed using only algebra and topology, and proving the transfer principle as a consequence of the definitions. In other words hyperreal numbers "per se", aside from their use in nonstandard analysis, have no necessary relationship to model theory or first order logic, although they were discovered by the application of model theoretic techniques from logic. Hyper-real fields were in fact originally introduced by Hewitt (1948) by purely algebraic techniques, using an ultrapower construction.
The ultrapower construction.
We are going to construct a hyperreal field via sequences of reals. In fact we can add and multiply sequences componentwise; for example:
and analogously for multiplication.
This turns the set of such sequences into a commutative ring, which is in fact a real algebra A. We have a natural embedding of R in A by identifying the real number "r" with the sequence ("r", "r", "r", …) and this identification preserves the corresponding algebraic operations of the reals. The intuitive motivation is, for example, to represent an infinitesimal number using a sequence that approaches zero. The inverse of such a sequence would represent an infinite number. As we will see below, the difficulties arise because of the need to define rules for comparing such sequences in a manner that, although inevitably somewhat arbitrary, must be self-consistent and well defined. For example, we may have two sequences that differ in their first "n" members, but are equal after that; such sequences should clearly be considered as representing the same hyperreal number. Similarly, most sequences oscillate randomly forever, and we must find some way of taking such a sequence and interpreting it as, say, formula_8, where formula_9 is a certain infinitesimal number.
Comparing sequences is thus a delicate matter. We could, for example, try to define a relation between sequences in a componentwise fashion:
but here we run into trouble, since some entries of the first sequence may be bigger than the corresponding entries of the second sequence, and some others may be smaller. It follows that the relation defined in this way is only a partial order. To get around this, we have to specify which positions matter. Since there are infinitely many indices, we don't want finite sets of indices to matter. A consistent choice of index sets that matter is given by any free ultrafilter "U" on the natural numbers; these can be characterized as ultrafilters that do not contain any finite sets. (The good news is that Zorn's lemma guarantees the existence of many such "U"; the bad news is that they cannot be explicitly constructed.) We think of "U" as singling out those sets of indices that "matter": We write ("a"0, "a"1, "a"2, ...) ≤ ("b"0, "b"1, "b"2, ...) if and only if the set of natural numbers { "n" : "a""n" ≤ "b""n" } is in "U".
This is a total preorder and it turns into a total order if we agree not to distinguish between two sequences "a" and "b" if "a"≤"b" and "b"≤"a". With this identification, the ordered field *R of hyperreals is constructed. From an algebraic point of view, "U" allows us to define a corresponding maximal ideal I in the commutative ring A (namely, the set of the sequences that vanish in some element of "U"), and then to define *R as A/I; as the quotient of a commutative ring by a maximal ideal, *R is a field. This is also notated A/"U", directly in terms of the free ultrafilter "U"; the two are equivalent. The maximality of I follows from the possibility of, given a sequence "a", constructing a sequence "b" inverting the non-null elements of "a" and not altering its null entries. If the set on which "a" vanishes is not in "U", the product "ab" is identified with the number 1, and any ideal containing 1 must be "A". In the resulting field, these "a" and "b" are inverses.
The field A/"U" is an ultrapower of R.
Since this field contains R it has cardinality at least that of the continuum. Since A has cardinality
it is also no larger than formula_12, and hence has the same cardinality as R.
One question we might ask is whether, if we had chosen a different free ultrafilter "V", the quotient field A/"U" would be isomorphic as an ordered field to A/"V". This question turns out to be equivalent to the continuum hypothesis; in ZFC with the continuum hypothesis we can prove this field is unique up to order isomorphism, and in ZFC with the negation of continuum hypothesis we can prove that there are non-order-isomorphic pairs of fields that are both countably indexed ultrapowers of the reals.
For more information about this method of construction, see ultraproduct.
An intuitive approach to the ultrapower construction.
The following is an intuitive way of understanding the hyperreal numbers. The approach taken here is very close to the one in the book by Goldblatt. Recall that the sequences converging to zero are sometimes called infinitely small. These are almost the infinitesimals in a sense; the true infinitesimals include certain classes of sequences that contain a sequence converging to zero.
Let us see where these classes come from. Consider first the sequences of real numbers. They form a ring, that is, one can multiply, add and subtract them, but not always divide by a non-zero element. The real numbers are considered as the constant sequences, the sequence is zero if it is identically zero, that is, "a""n" = 0 for all "n".
In our ring of sequences one can get "ab" = 0 with neither "a" = 0 nor "b" = 0. Thus, if for two sequences formula_13 one has "ab" = 0, at least one of them should be declared zero. Surprisingly enough, there is a consistent way to do it. As a result, the equivalence classes of sequences that differ by some sequence declared zero will form a field, which is called a hyperreal field. It will contain the infinitesimals in addition to the ordinary real numbers, as well as infinitely large numbers (the reciprocals of infinitesimals, including those represented by sequences diverging to infinity). Also every hyperreal that is not infinitely large will be infinitely close to an ordinary real, in other words, it will be the sum of an ordinary real and an infinitesimal.
This construction is parallel to the construction of the reals from the rationals given by Cantor. He started with the ring of the Cauchy sequences of rationals and declared all the sequences that converge to zero to be zero. The result is the reals. To continue the construction of hyperreals, let us consider the zero sets of our sequences, that is, the formula_14, that is, formula_15 is the set of indexes formula_16 for which formula_17. It is clear that if formula_18, then the union of formula_15 and formula_20 is "N" (the set of all natural numbers), so:
Now the idea is to single out a bunch "U" of subsets "X" of "N" and to declare that formula_27 if and only if formula_15 belongs to "U". From the above conditions one can see that:
Any family of sets that satisfies (2–4) is called a filter (an example: the complements to the finite sets, it is called the Fréchet filter and it is used in the usual limit theory). If (1) also holds, U is called an ultrafilter (because you can add no more sets to it without breaking it). The only explicitly known example of an ultrafilter is the family of sets containing a given element (in our case, say, the number 10). Such ultrafilters are called trivial, and if we use it in our construction, we come back to the ordinary real numbers. Any ultrafilter containing a finite set is trivial. It is known that any filter can be extended to an ultrafilter, but the proof uses the axiom of choice. The existence of a nontrivial ultrafilter (the ultrafilter lemma) can be added as an extra axiom, as it is weaker than the axiom of choice.
Now if we take a nontrivial ultrafilter (which is an extension of the Fréchet filter) and do our construction, we get the hyperreal numbers as a result.
If formula_29 is a real function of a real variable formula_30 then formula_29 naturally extends to a hyperreal function of a hyperreal variable by composition:
where formula_33 means "the equivalence class of the sequence formula_34 relative to our ultrafilter", two sequences being in the same class if and only if the zero set of their difference belongs to our ultrafilter.
All the arithmetical expressions and formulas make sense for hyperreals and hold true if they are true for the ordinary reals. It turns out that any finite (that is, such that <math>|x| for some ordinary real formula_21) hyperreal formula_30 will be of the form formula_37 where formula_38 is an ordinary (called standard) real and formula_39 is an infinitesimal. It can be proven by bisection method used in proving the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, the property (1) of ultrafilters turns out to be crucial.
Now one can see that formula_29 is continuous means that formula_41 is infinitely small whenever formula_42 is, and formula_29 is differentiable means that
is infinitely small whenever formula_42 is. Remarkably, if one allows formula_21 to be hyperreal, the derivative will be automatically continuous (because, formula_29 being differentiable at formula_30,
is infinitely small when formula_42 is, therefore formula_51 is also infinitely small when formula_42 is).
Properties of infinitesimal and infinite numbers.
The finite elements F of *R form a local ring, and in fact a valuation ring, with the unique maximal ideal S being the infinitesimals; the quotient F/S is isomorphic to the reals. Hence we have a homomorphic mapping, st("x"), from F to R whose kernel consists of the infinitesimals and which sends every element "x" of F to a unique real number whose difference from x is in S; which is to say, is infinitesimal. Put another way, every "finite" nonstandard real number is "very close" to a unique real number, in the sense that if "x" is a finite nonstandard real, then there exists one and only one real number st("x") such that "x" – st("x") is infinitesimal. This number st("x") is called the standard part of "x", conceptually the same as "x" "to the nearest real number". This operation is an order-preserving homomorphism and hence is well-behaved both algebraically and order theoretically. It is order-preserving though not isotonic; i.e. formula_53 implies formula_54, but formula_55 does not imply formula_56.
The map st is continuous with respect to the order topology on the finite hyperreals; in fact it is locally constant.
Hyperreal fields.
Suppose "X" is a Tychonoff space, also called a T3.5 space, and C("X") is the algebra of continuous real-valued functions on "X". Suppose M is a maximal ideal in C("X"). Then the factor algebra A = C("X")/M is a totally ordered field F containing the reals. If F strictly contains R then M is called a hyperreal ideal (terminology due to Hewitt (1948)) and F a hyperreal field. Note that no assumption is being made that the cardinality of F is greater than R; it can in fact have the same cardinality.
An important special case is where the topology on "X" is the discrete topology; in this case "X" can be identified with a cardinal number κ and C("X") with the real algebra formula_61 of functions from κ to R. The hyperreal fields we obtain in this case are called ultrapowers of R and are identical to the ultrapowers constructed via free ultrafilters in model theory.

</doc>
<doc id="51432" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51432" title="Surreal number">
Surreal number

In mathematics, the surreal number system is an arithmetic continuum containing the real numbers as well as infinite and infinitesimal numbers, respectively larger or smaller in absolute value than any positive real number. The surreals share many properties with the reals, including a total order ≤ and the usual arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division); as such, they form an ordered field. (Strictly speaking, the surreals are not a set, but a proper class.) If formulated in Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory, the surreal numbers are the largest possible ordered field; all other ordered fields, such as the rationals, the reals, the rational functions, the Levi-Civita field, the superreal numbers, and the hyperreal numbers, can be realized as subfields of the surreals. It has also been shown (in Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory) that the maximal class hyperreal field is isomorphic to the maximal class surreal field; in theories without the axiom of global choice, this need not be the case, and in such theories it is not necessarily true that the surreals are the largest ordered field. The surreals also contain all transfinite ordinal numbers; the arithmetic on them is given by the natural operations.
In 1907 Hahn introduced Hahn series as a generalization of formal power series, and Hausdorff introduced certain ordered sets called ηα-sets for ordinals α and asked if it was possible to find a compatible ordered group or field structure. In 1962 Alling used a modified form of Hahn series to construct such ordered fields associated to certain ordinals α, and taking α to be the class of all ordinals in his construction gives a class that is an ordered field isomorphic to the surreal numbers. 
Research on the go endgame by John Horton Conway led to another definition and construction of the surreal numbers. Conway's construction was introduced in Donald Knuth's 1974 book "Surreal Numbers: How Two Ex-Students Turned on to Pure Mathematics and Found Total Happiness". In his book, which takes the form of a dialogue, Knuth coined the term "surreal numbers" for what Conway had called simply "numbers". Conway later adopted Knuth's term, and used surreals for analyzing games in his 1976 book "On Numbers and Games".
Overview.
In the Conway construction, the surreal numbers are constructed in stages, along with an ordering ≤ such that for any two surreal numbers "a" and "b" either "a" ≤ "b" or "b" ≤ "a". (Both may hold, in which case "a" and "b" are equivalent and denote the same number.) Numbers are formed by pairing subsets of numbers already constructed: given subsets "L" and "R" of numbers such that all the members of "L" are strictly less than all the members of "R", then the pair { "L" | "R" } represents a number intermediate in value between all the members of "L" and all the members of "R".
Different subsets may end up defining the same number: { "L" | "R" } and { "L′" | "R′" } may define the same number even if "L" ≠ "L′" and "R" ≠ "R′". (A similar phenomenon occurs when rational numbers are defined as quotients of integers: 1/2 and 2/4 are different representations of the same rational number.) So strictly speaking, the surreal numbers are equivalence classes of representations of form { "L" | "R" } that designate the same number.
In the first stage of construction, there are no previously existing numbers so the only representation must use the empty set: { | }. This representation, where "L" and "R" are both empty, is called 0. Subsequent stages yield forms like:
and
The integers are thus contained within the surreal numbers. (The above identities are definitions, in the sense that the right-hand side is a name for the left-hand side. That the names are actually appropriate will be evident when the arithmetic operations on surreal numbers are defined, as in the section below). Similarly, representations arise like:
so that the dyadic rationals (rational numbers whose denominators are powers of 2) are contained within the surreal numbers.
After an infinite number of stages, infinite subsets become available, so that any real number "a" can be represented by { "La" | "Ra" },
where "La" is the set of all dyadic rationals less than "a" and 
"Ra" is the set of all dyadic rationals greater than "a" (reminiscent of a Dedekind cut). Thus the real numbers are also embedded within the surreals.
But there are also representations like
where ω is a transfinite number greater than all integers and ε is an infinitesimal greater than 0 but less than any positive real number. Moreover, the standard arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) can be extended to these non-real numbers in a manner that turns the collection of surreal numbers into an ordered field, so that one can talk about 2ω or ω − 1 and so forth.
Construction.
Surreal numbers are constructed inductively as equivalence classes of pairs of sets of surreal numbers, restricted by the condition that each element of the first set is smaller than each element of the second set. The construction consists of three interdependent parts: the construction rule, the comparison rule and the equivalence rule.
Forms.
A "form" is a pair of sets of surreal numbers, called its "left set" and its "right set". A form with left set "L" and right set "R" is written { "L" | "R" }. When "L" and "R" are given as lists of elements, the braces around them are omitted.
Either or both of the left and right set of a form may be the empty set. The form { { } | { } } with both left and right set empty is also written { | }.
Numeric forms.
Construction Rule
Equivalence classes of numeric forms.
The numeric forms are placed in equivalence classes; each such equivalence class is a "surreal number". The elements of the left and right set of a form are drawn from the universe of the surreal numbers (not of "forms", but of their "equivalence classes").
Equivalence Rule
An ordering relationship must be antisymmetric, i.e., it must have the property that "x" = "y" (i. e., "x" ≤ "y" and "y" ≤ "x" are both true) only when "x" and "y" are the same object. This is not the case for surreal number "forms", but is true by construction for surreal "numbers" (equivalence classes).
The equivalence class containing { | } is labeled 0; in other words, { | } is a form of the surreal number 0.
Order.
The recursive definition of surreal numbers is completed by defining comparison:
Given numeric forms "x" = { "XL" | "XR" } and "y" = { "YL" | "YR" }, "x" ≤ "y" if and only if:
A comparison "y" ≤ "c" between a form "y" and a surreal number "c" is performed by choosing a form "z" from the equivalence class "c" and evaluating "y" ≤ "z"; and likewise for "c" ≤ "x" and for comparison "b" ≤ "c" between two surreal numbers.
Induction.
This group of definitions is recursive, and requires some form of mathematical induction to define the universe of objects (forms and numbers) that occur in them. The only surreal numbers reachable via "finite induction" are the dyadic fractions; a wider universe is reachable given some form of transfinite induction.
Induction Rule
The base case is actually a special case of the induction rule, with 0 taken as a label for the "least ordinal". Since there exists no "Si" with "i" < 0, the expression formula_2 is the empty set; the only subset of the empty set is the empty set, and therefore "S"0 consists of a single surreal form { | } lying in a single equivalence class 0.
For every finite ordinal number "n", "Sn" is well-ordered by the ordering induced by the comparison rule on the surreal numbers.
The first iteration of the induction rule produces the three numeric forms { | 0 } < { | } < { 0 | } (the form { 0 | 0 } is non-numeric because 0≤0). The equivalence class containing { 0 | } is labeled 1 and the equivalence class containing { | 0 } is labeled −1. These three labels have a special significance in the axioms that define a ring; they are the additive identity (0), the multiplicative identity (1), and the additive inverse of 1 (−1). The arithmetic operations defined below are consistent with these labels.
For every "i" < "n", since every valid form in "S""i" is also a valid form in "S""n", all of the numbers in "Si" also appear in "Sn" (as supersets of their representation in "Si"). (The set union expression appears in our construction rule, rather than the simpler form "Sn-1", so that the definition also makes sense when "n" is a limit ordinal.) Numbers in "Sn" that are a superset of some number in "Si" are said to have been "inherited" from generation "i". The smallest value of α for which a given surreal number appears in "S"α is called its "birthday". For example, the birthday of 0 is 0, and the birthday of −1 is 1.
A second iteration of the construction rule yields the following ordering of equivalence classes:
Comparison of these equivalence classes is consistent irrespective of the choice of form. Three observations follow:
The informal interpretations of { 1 | } and { | −1 } are "the number just after 1" and "the number just before −1" respectively; their equivalence classes are labeled 2 and −2. The informal interpretations of { 0 | 1 } and { −1 | 0 } are "the number halfway between 0 and 1" and "the number halfway between −1 and 0" respectively; their equivalence classes are labeled 1/2 and −1/2. These labels will also be justified by the rules for surreal addition and multiplication below.
The equivalence classes at each stage "n" of induction may be characterized by their "n"-"complete forms" (each containing as many elements as possible of previous generations in its left and right sets). Either this complete form contains "every" number from previous generations in its left or right set, in which case this is the first generation in which this number occurs; or it contains all numbers from previous generations but one, in which case it is a new form of this one number. We retain the labels from the previous generation for these "old" numbers, and write the ordering above using the old and new labels:
The third observation extends to all surreal numbers with finite left and right sets. (For infinite left or right sets, this is valid in an altered form, since infinite sets might not contain a maximal or minimal element.) The number { 1, 2 | 5, 8 } is therefore equivalent to { 2 | 5 }; one can establish that these are forms of 3 by using the "birthday property", which is a consequence of the rules above.
Birthday property
Arithmetic.
The addition, negation (additive inverse), and multiplication of surreal number "forms" "x" = { "XL" | "XR" } and "y" = { "YL" | "YR" } are defined by three recursive formulas.
Negation.
Negation of a given number "x" = { "XL" | "XR" } is defined by
where the negation of a set "S" of numbers is given by the set of the negated elements of "S":
This formula involves the negation of the surreal "numbers" appearing in the left and right sets of "x", which is to be understood as the result of choosing a form of the number, evaluating the negation of this form, and taking the equivalence class of the resulting form. This only makes sense if the result is the same irrespective of the choice of form of the operand. This can be proven inductively using the fact that the numbers occurring in "XL" and "XR" are drawn from generations earlier than that in which the form "x" first occurs, and observing the special case:
Addition.
The definition of addition is also a recursive formula:
where
This formula involves sums of one of the original operands and a surreal "number" drawn from the left or right set of the other. These are to be understood as the result of choosing a form of the numeric operand, performing the sum of the two forms, and taking the equivalence class of the resulting form. This only makes sense if the result is the same irrespective of the choice of form of the numeric operand. This can also be proven inductively with the special cases:
Multiplication.
The recursive formula for multiplication contains arithmetic expressions involving the operands and their left and right sets, such as the expression formula_7 that appears in the left set of the product of "x" and "y". This is to be understood as the set of surreal numbers resulting from choosing one number from each set that appears in the expression and evaluating the expression on these numbers. (In each individual evaluation of the expression, only one number is chosen from each set, and is substituted in each place where that set appears in the expression.)
This depends, in turn, on the ability to (a) multiply pairs of surreal "numbers" drawn from the left and right sets of "x" and "y" to get a surreal number, and negate the result; (b) multiply the surreal number "form" "x" or "y" and a surreal "number" drawn from the left or right set of the other operand to get a surreal number; and (c) add the resulting surreal numbers. This again involves special cases, this time containing 0 = { | }, the multiplicative identity 1 = { 0 | }, and its additive inverse -1 = { | 0 }.
Consistency.
It can be shown that the definitions of negation, addition and multiplication are consistent, in the sense that:
With these rules one can now verify that the numbers found in the first few generations were properly labeled. The construction rule is repeated to obtain more generations of surreals:
Arithmetic closure.
For each natural number (finite ordinal) "n", all numbers generated in "Sn" are dyadic fractions, i.e., can be written as an irreducible fraction formula_9
where "a" and "b" are integers and 0 ≤ "b" < "n".
The set of all surreal numbers that are generated in some "Sn" for finite "n" may be denoted as "S"* = formula_10. One may form the three classes "S"0 = { 0 }, "S"+ = formula_11, and "S"− = formula_12, of which "S*" is the union. No individual "Sn" is closed under addition and multiplication (except "S"0), but "S"* is; it is the subring of the rationals consisting of all dyadic fractions.
There are infinite ordinal numbers β for which the set of surreal numbers with birthday less than β is closed under the different arithmetic operations. For any ordinal α, the set of surreal numbers with birthday less than β = ωα (using powers of ω) is closed under addition and forms a group; for birthday less than ωωα it is closed under multiplication and forms a ring; and for birthday less than an (ordinal) epsilon number εα it is closed under multiplicative inverse and forms a field. The latter sets are also closed under the exponential function as defined by Kruskal and Gonshor.
However, it is always possible to construct a surreal number that is greater than any member of a set (by including the set on the left side of the constructor) and thus the collection of surreal numbers is a proper class. With their ordering and algebraic operations they constitute an ordered field, with the caveat that they do not form a set. In fact, it is a very special ordered field: the biggest one. Every other ordered field can be embedded in the surreals. The class of all surreal numbers is denoted by the symbol formula_13.
Infinity.
Let there be an ordinal ω greater than the natural numbers, and define "S"ω as the set of all surreal numbers generated by the construction rule from subsets of "S*". (This is the same inductive step as before, since the ordinal number ω is the smallest ordinal that is larger than all natural numbers; however, the set union appearing in the inductive step is now an infinite union of finite sets, and so this step can only be performed in a set theory that allows such a union.) A unique infinitely large positive number occurs in "S"ω:
"S"ω also contains objects that can be identified as the rational numbers. For example, the ω-complete form of the fraction 1/3 is given by:
The product of this form of 1/3 with any form of 3 is a form whose left set contains only numbers less than 1 and whose right set contains only numbers greater than 1; the birthday property implies that this product is a form of 1.
Not only do all the rest of the rational numbers appear in "S"ω; the remaining finite real numbers do too. For example
The only infinities in "S"ω are ω and -ω; but there are other non-real numbers in "S"ω among the reals. Consider the smallest positive number in "S"ω:
This number is larger than zero but less than all positive dyadic fractions. It is therefore an infinitesimal number, often labeled ε. The ω-complete form of ε (resp. -ε) is the same as the ω-complete form of 0, except that 0 is included in the left (resp. right) set. The only "pure" infinitesimals in "S"ω are ε and its additive inverse -ε; adding them to any dyadic fraction "y" produces the numbers "y"±ε, which also lie in "S"ω.
One can determine the relationship between ω and ε by multiplying particular forms of them to obtain:
This expression is only well-defined in a set theory which permits transfinite induction up to formula_18. In such a system, one can demonstrate that all the elements of the left set of ω · ε are positive infinitesimals and all the elements of the right set are positive infinities, and therefore ω · ε is the oldest positive finite number, i. e., 1. Consequently,
Some authors systematically use ω−1 in place of the symbol ε.
Contents of "S"ω.
Given any "x" = { "L" | "R" } in "S"ω, exactly one of the following is true:
"S"ω is not an algebraic field, because it is not closed under arithmetic operations; consider ω+1, whose form formula_21 does not lie in any number in "S"ω. The maximal subset of "S"ω that is closed under (finite series of) arithmetic operations is the field of real numbers, obtained by leaving out the infinities ±ω, the infinitesimals ±ε, and the infinitesimal neighbors "y"±ε of each nonzero dyadic fraction "y".
This construction of the real numbers differs from the Dedekind cuts of standard analysis in that it starts from dyadic fractions rather than general rationals and naturally identifies each dyadic fraction in "S"ω with its forms in previous generations. (The ω-complete forms of real elements of "S"ω are in one-to-one correspondence with the reals obtained by Dedekind cuts, under the proviso that Dedekind reals corresponding to rational numbers are represented by the form in which the cut point is omitted from both left and right sets.) The rationals are not an identifiable stage in the surreal construction; they are merely the subset "Q" of "S"ω containing all elements "x" such that "x" "b" = "a" for some "a" and some nonzero "b", both drawn from "S"*. By demonstrating that "Q" is closed under individual repetitions of the surreal arithmetic operations, one can show that it is a field; and by showing that every element of "Q" is reachable from "S"* by a finite series (no longer than two, actually) of arithmetic operations "including multiplicative inversion", one can show that "Q" is strictly smaller than the subset of "S"ω identified with the reals.
Transfinite induction.
Continuing to perform transfinite induction beyond "S"ω produces more ordinal numbers α, each represented as the largest surreal number having birthday α. (This is essentially a definition of the ordinal numbers resulting from transfinite induction.) The first such ordinal is ω+1 = { ω | }. There is another positive infinite number in generation ω+1:
It is important to observe that the surreal number ω−1 is not an ordinal; the ordinal ω is not the successor of any ordinal. This is a surreal number with birthday ω+1, which is labeled ω−1 on the basis that it coincides with the sum of ω = { 1, 2, 3, 4, ... | } and −1 = { | 0 }. Similarly, there are two new infinitesimal numbers in generation ω+1:
At a later stage of transfinite induction, there is a number larger than ω+"k" for all natural numbers "k":
This number may be labeled ω + ω both because its birthday is ω + ω (the first ordinal number not reachable from ω by the successor operation) and because it coincides with the surreal sum of ω and ω; it may also be labeled 2ω because it coincides with the product of ω = { 1, 2, 3, 4, ... | } and 2 = { 1 | }. It is the second limit ordinal; reaching it from ω via the construction step requires a transfinite induction on formula_22. This involves an infinite union of infinite sets, which is a "stronger" set theoretic operation than the previous transfinite induction required.
Note that the "conventional" addition and multiplication of ordinals does not always coincide with these operations on their surreal representations. The sum of ordinals 1 + ω equals ω, but the surreal sum is commutative and produces 1 + ω = ω + 1 > ω. The addition and multiplication of the surreal numbers associated with ordinals coincides with the natural sum and natural product of ordinals.
Just as 2ω is bigger than ω + "n" for any natural number "n", there is a surreal number ω/2 that is infinite but smaller than ω − "n" for any natural number "n". That is, ω/2 is defined by
where on the right hand side the notation "x" − "Y" is used to mean { "x" − "y" : "y" in "Y" }. It can be identified as the product of ω and the form { 0 | 1 } of 1/2. The birthday of ω/2 is the limit ordinal ω2.
Powers of ω.
To classify the "orders" of infinite and infinitesimal surreal numbers, also known as archimedean classes, Conway associated to each surreal number "x" the surreal number
where "r" and "s" range over the positive real numbers. If "x" < "y" then ω"y" is "infinitely greater" than ω"x", in that it is greater than "r" ω"x" for all real numbers "r". Powers of ω also satisfy the conditions
so they behave the way one would expect powers to behave.
Each power of ω also has the redeeming feature of being the "simplest" surreal number in its archimedean class; conversely, every archimedean class within the surreal numbers contains a unique simplest member. Thus, for every positive surreal number "x" there will always exist some positive real number "r" and some surreal number "y" so that "x" − "r" ω"y" is "infinitely smaller" than "x". The exponent "y" is the "base ω logarithm" of "x", defined on the positive surreals; it can be demonstrated that logω maps the positive surreals onto the surreals and that logω("xy") = logω("x") + logω("y").
This gets extended by transfinite induction so that every surreal number "x" has a "normal form" analogous to the Cantor normal form for ordinal numbers. Every surreal number may be uniquely written as
where every "r"α is a nonzero real number and the "y"αs form a strictly decreasing sequence of surreal numbers. This "sum", however, may have infinitely many terms, and in general has the length of an arbitrary ordinal number. (Zero corresponds of course to the case of an empty sequence, and is the only surreal number with no leading exponent.)
Looked at in this manner, the surreal numbers resemble a power series field, except that the decreasing sequences of exponents must be bounded in length by an ordinal and are not allowed to be as long as the class of ordinals. This is the basis for the formulation of the surreal numbers as a Hahn series.
Surcomplex numbers.
A surcomplex number is a number of the form formula_23, where "a" and "b" are surreal numbers. The surcomplex numbers form an algebraically closed field (except for being a proper class), isomorphic to the algebraic closure of the field generated by extending the rational numbers by a proper class of algebraically independent transcendental elements. Up to field isomorphism, this fact characterizes the field of surcomplex numbers within any fixed set theory.
Games.
The definition of surreal numbers contained one restriction: each element of L must be strictly less than each element of R. If this restriction is dropped we can generate a more general class known as "games". All games are constructed according to this rule:
Addition, negation, and comparison are all defined the same way for both surreal numbers and games.
Every surreal number is a game, but not all games are surreal numbers, e.g. the game { 0 | 0 } is not a surreal number. The class of games is more general than the surreals, and has a simpler definition, but lacks some of the nicer properties of surreal numbers. The class of surreal numbers forms a field, but the class of games does not. The surreals have a total order: given any two surreals, they are either equal, or one is greater than the other. The games have only a partial order: there exist pairs of games that are neither equal, greater than, nor less than each other. Each surreal number is either positive, negative, or zero. Each game is either positive, negative, "zero", or "fuzzy" (incomparable with zero, such as {1|−1}).
A move in a game involves the player whose move it is choosing a game from those available in L (for the left player) or R (for the right player) and then passing this chosen game to the other player. A player who cannot move because the choice is from the empty set has lost. A positive game represents a win for the left player, a negative game for the right player, a zero game for the second player to move, and a fuzzy game for the first player to move.
If "x", "y", and "z" are surreals, and "x"="y", then "x" "z"="y" "z". However, if "x", "y", and "z" are games, and "x"="y", then it is not always true that "x" "z"="y" "z". Note that "=" here means equality, not identity.
Application to combinatorial game theory.
The surreal numbers were originally motivated by studies of the game Go, and there are numerous connections between popular games and the surreals. In this section, we will use a capitalized "Game" for the mathematical object {L|R}, and the lowercase "game" for recreational games like Chess or Go.
We consider games with these properties:
For most games, the initial board position gives no great advantage to either player. As the game progresses and one player starts to win, board positions will occur where that player has a clear advantage. For analyzing games, it is useful to associate a Game with every board position. The value of a given position will be the Game {L|R}, where L is the set of values of all the positions that can be reached in a single move by Left. Similarly, R is the set of values of all the positions that can be reached in a single move by Right.
The zero Game (called 0) is the Game where L and R are both empty, so the player to move next (L or R) immediately loses. The sum of two Games G = { L1 | R1 } and H = { L2 | R2 } is defined as the Game G + H = { L1 + H, G + L2 | R1 + H, G + R2 } where the player to move chooses which of the Games to play in at each stage, and the loser is still the player who ends up with no legal move. One can imagine two chess boards between two players, with players making moves alternatively, but with complete freedom as to which board to play on. If G is the Game {L | R}, -G is the game {-R | -L}, i.e. with the role of the two players reversed. It is easy to show G - G = 0 for all Games G (where G - H is defined as G + (-H)).
This simple way to associate Games with games yields a very interesting result. Suppose two perfect players play a game starting with a given position whose associated Game is "x". We can classify all Games into four classes as follows:
More generally, we can define G > H as G - H > 0, and similarly for <, = and ||.
The notation G || H means that G and H are incomparable. G || H is equivalent to G−H || 0, i.e. that G > H, G < H and G = H are all false. Incomparable games are sometimes said to be "confused" with each other, because one or the other may be preferred by a player depending on what is added to it. A game confused with zero is said to be fuzzy, as opposed to positive, negative, or zero. An example of a fuzzy game is star (*).
Sometimes when a game nears the end, it will decompose into several smaller games that do not interact, except in that each player's turn allows moving in only one of them. For example, in Go, the board will slowly fill up with pieces until there are just a few small islands of empty space where a player can move. Each island is like a separate game of Go, played on a very small board. It would be useful if each subgame could be analyzed separately, and then the results combined to give an analysis of the entire game. This doesn't appear to be easy to do. For example, you might have two subgames where whoever moves first wins, but when they are combined into one big game, it's no longer the first player who wins. Fortunately, there is a way to do this analysis. Just use the following remarkable theorem:
A game composed of smaller games is called the disjunctive sum of those smaller games, and the theorem states that the method of addition we defined is equivalent to taking the disjunctive sum of the addends.
Historically, Conway developed the theory of surreal numbers in the reverse order of how it has been presented here. He was analyzing Go endgames, and realized that it would be useful to have some way to combine the analyses of non-interacting subgames into an analysis of their disjunctive sum. From this he invented the concept of a Game and the addition operator for it. From there he moved on to developing a definition of negation and comparison. Then he noticed that a certain class of Games had interesting properties; this class became the surreal numbers. Finally, he developed the multiplication operator, and proved that the surreals are actually a field, and that it includes both the reals and ordinals.
Alternative realizations.
Since Conway first introduced surreal numbers, several alternative constructions
have been developed.
Sign expansion.
Definitions.
In one alternative realization, called the "sign-expansion" or "sign-sequence" of a surreal number, a surreal number is a function whose domain is an ordinal and whose codomain is { −1, +1 }.
Define the binary predicate "simpler than" on numbers by "x" is simpler than "y" if "x" is a proper subset of "y", "i.e." if dom("x") < dom("y") and "x"(α) = "y"(α) for all α < dom("x").
For surreal numbers define the binary relation < to be lexicographic order (with the convention that "undefined values" are greater than −1 and less than 1). So "x" < "y" if one of the following holds:
Equivalently, let δ("x","y") = min({ dom("x"), dom("y")} ∪ { α :
α < dom("x") ∧ α < dom("y") ∧ "x"(α) ≠ "y"(α) }),
so that "x" = "y" if and only if δ("x","y") = dom("x") = dom("y"). Then, for numbers "x" and "y", "x" < "y" if and only if one of the following holds:
For numbers "x" and "y", "x" ≤ "y" if and only if "x" < "y" ∨ "x" = "y", and "x" > "y" if and only if "y" < "x". Also "x" ≥ "y" if and only if "y" ≤ "x".
The relation < is transitive, and for all numbers "x" and "y", exactly one of "x" < "y", "x" = "y", "x" > "y", holds (law of trichotomy). This means that < is a linear order (except that < is a proper class).
For sets of numbers, "L" and "R" such that ∀"x" ∈ "L" ∀"y" ∈ "R" ("x" < "y"), there exists a unique number "z" such that
Furthermore, "z" is constructible from "L" and "R" by transfinite induction. "z" is the simplest number between "L" and "R". Let the unique number "z" be denoted by σ("L","R").
For a number "x", define its left set "L"("x") and right set "R"("x") by
then σ("L"("x"),"R"("x")) = "x".
One advantage of this alternative realization is that equality is identity, not an inductively defined relation. Unlike Conway's realization of the surreal numbers, however, the sign-expansion requires a prior construction of the ordinals, while in Conway's realization, the ordinals are constructed as particular cases of surreals.
However, similar definitions can be made that eliminate the need for prior construction of the ordinals. For instance, we could let the surreals be the (recursively-defined) class of functions whose domain is a subset of the surreals satisfying the transitivity rule ∀"g" ∈ dom "f" (∀"h" ∈ dom "g" ("h" ∈ dom "f" )) and whose range is { −, + }. "Simpler than" is very simply defined now—"x" is simpler than "y" if "x" ∈ dom "y". The total ordering is defined by considering "x" and "y" as sets of ordered pairs (as a function is normally defined): Either "x" = "y", or else the surreal number "z" = "x" ∩ "y" is in the domain of "x" or the domain of "y" (or both, but in this case the signs must disagree). We then have "x" < "y" if "x"("z") = − or "y"("z") = + (or both). Converting these functions into sign sequences is a straightforward task; arrange the elements of dom "f" in order of simplicity (i.e., inclusion), and then write down the signs that "f" assigns to each of these elements in order. The ordinals then occur naturally as those surreal numbers whose range is { + }.
Addition and multiplication.
The sum "x" + "y" of two numbers, "x" and "y", is defined by induction on dom("x") and dom("y") by "x" + "y" = σ("L","R"), where
The additive identity is given by the number 0 = { }, "i.e." the number 0 is the unique function whose domain is the ordinal 0, and the additive inverse of the number "x" is the number − "x", given by dom(− "x") = dom("x"), and, for α < dom("x"), (− "x")(α) = − 1 if "x"(α) = + 1, and (− "x")(α) = + 1 if "x"(α) = − 1.
It follows that a number "x" is positive if and only if 0 < dom("x") and "x"(0) = + 1, and "x" is negative if and only if 0 < dom("x") and "x"(0) = − 1.
The product "xy" of two numbers, "x" and "y", is defined by induction on dom("x") and dom("y") by "xy" = σ("L","R"), where
The multiplicative identity is given by the number 1 = { (0,+ 1) }, "i.e." the number 1 has domain equal to the ordinal 1, and 1(0) = + 1.
Correspondence with Conway.
The map from Conway's realization to sign expansions is given by "f"({ "L" | "R" }) = σ("M","S"), where "M" = { "f"("x") : "x" ∈ "L" } and "S" = { "f"("x") : "x" ∈ "R" }.
The inverse map from the alternative realization to Conway's realization is given by "g"("x") = { "L" | "R" }, where "L" = { "g"("y") : "y" ∈ "L"("x") } and "R" = { "g"("y") : "y" ∈ "R"("x") }.
Axiomatic approach.
In another approach to the surreals, given by Alling, explicit construction is bypassed altogether. Instead, a set of axioms is given that any particular approach to the surreals must satisfy. Much like the axiomatic approach to the reals, these axioms guarantee uniqueness up to isomorphism.
A triple formula_24 is a surreal number system if and only if the following hold:
Both Conway's original construction and the sign-expansion construction of surreals satisfy these axioms.
Given these axioms, Alling derives Conway's original definition of ≤ and develops surreal arithmetic.
Hahn series.
Alling also proves that the field of surreal numbers is isomorphic (as an ordered field) to the field of Hahn series with real coefficients on the value group of surreal numbers themselves (the series representation corresponding to the normal form of a surreal number, as defined above). This provides a connection between surreal numbers and more conventional mathematical approaches to ordered field theory.
This isomorphism makes the surreal numbers into a valued field where the valuation is the additive inverse of the exponent of the leading term in the Conway normal form, e.g., ν(ω) = -1. The valuation ring then consists of the finite surreal numbers (numbers with a real and/or an infinitesimal part). The reason for the sign inversion is that the exponents in the Conway normal form constitute a reverse well-ordered set, whereas Hahn series are formulated in terms of (non-reversed) well-ordered subsets of the value group.
Relation to hyperreals.
Philip Ehrlich has constructed an isomorphism between Conway's maximal surreal number field and the maximal hyperreals in von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory.

</doc>
<doc id="51434" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51434" title="Sedenion">
Sedenion

In abstract algebra, the sedenions form a 16-dimensional noncommutative and nonassociative algebra over the reals obtained by applying the Cayley–Dickson construction to the octonions. The set of sedenions is denoted by formula_1.
The term "sedenion" is also used for other 16-dimensional algebraic structures, such as a tensor product of 2 copies of the biquaternions, or the algebra of 4 by 4 matrices over the reals, or that studied by .
Arithmetic.
Like octonions, multiplication of sedenions is neither commutative nor associative.
But in contrast to the octonions, the sedenions do not even have the property of being alternative.
They do, however, have the property of power associativity, which can be stated as that, for any element x of formula_1, the power formula_3 is well defined. They are also flexible.
Every sedenion is a linear combination of the unit sedenions e0, e1, e2, e3, ...,e15,
which form a basis of the vector space of sedenions. Every sedenion can be represented in the form
Addition and subtraction are defined by the addition and subtraction of corresponding coefficients and multiplication is distributive over addition.
Like other algebras based on the Cayley–Dickson construction, the sedenions contain the algebra they were constructed from. So, they contain the octonions (e0 to e7 in the table below), and therefore also the quaternions (e0 to e3), complex numbers (e0 and e1) and reals (e0).
The sedenions have a multiplicative identity element e0 and multiplicative inverses but they are not a division algebra because they have zero divisors. This means that two non-zero sedenions can be multiplied to obtain zero: an example is (e3 + e10)×(e6 − e15). All hypercomplex number systems after sedenions that are based on the Cayley–Dickson construction contain zero divisors.
The multiplication table of these unit sedenions follows:
From the above table, we can see that:
The 35 triads that make up this specific sedenion multiplication table with the 7 triads of the octonion used in creating the sedenion through the Cayley–Dickson construction shown in bold red:
, , {2, 8, 10}, {2, 9, 11}, {2, 14, 12}, {2, 15, 13}, , <br>
, {3, 8, 11}, {3, 10, 9}, {3, 13, 14}, {3, 15, 12}, {4, 8, 12}, {4, 9, 13}, <br>
The list of 84 sets of zero divisors {ea, eb, ec, ed}, where 
(ea + eb)formula_9(ec + ed)=0:

</doc>
<doc id="51436" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51436" title="Octonion">
Octonion

In mathematics, the octonions are a normed division algebra over the real numbers, usually represented by the capital letter O, using boldface O or blackboard bold formula_1. There are three lower-dimensional normed division algebras over the reals: the real numbers R themselves, the complex numbers C, and the quaternions H. The octonions have eight dimensions; twice the number of dimensions of the quaternions, of which they are an extension. They are noncommutative and nonassociative, but satisfy a weaker form of associativity, namely they are alternative.
Octonions are not as well known as the quaternions and complex numbers, which are much more widely studied and used. Despite this, they have some interesting properties and are related to a number of exceptional structures in mathematics, among them the exceptional Lie groups. Additionally, octonions have applications in fields such as string theory, special relativity, and quantum logic.
The octonions were discovered in 1843 by John T. Graves, inspired by his friend W. R. Hamilton's discovery of quaternions. Graves called his discovery octaves, and mentioned them in a letter to Hamilton dated 16 December 1843, but his first publication of his result in was slightly later than Cayley's article on them. The octonions were discovered independently by Arthur Cayley and are sometimes referred to as Cayley numbers or the Cayley algebra. Hamilton described the early history of Graves' discovery.
Definition.
The octonions can be thought of as octets (or 8-tuples) of real numbers. Every octonion is a real linear combination of the unit octonions:
where "e"0 is the scalar or real element; it may be identified with the real number 1. That is, every octonion "x" can be written in the form
with real coefficients {"x""i"}.
Addition and subtraction of octonions is done by adding and subtracting corresponding terms and hence their coefficients, like quaternions. Multiplication is more complex. Multiplication is distributive over addition, so the product of two octonions can be calculated by summing the product of all the terms, again like quaternions. The product of each term can be given by multiplication of the coefficients and a multiplication table of the unit octonions, like this one: (This table is due to Arthur Cayley (1845) and John T. Graves (1843).)
Most off-diagonal elements of the table are antisymmetric, making it almost a skew-symmetric matrix except for the elements on the main diagonal, as well as the row and column for which is an operand.
The table can be summarized by the relations:
where formula_5 is a completely antisymmetric tensor with value +1 when "ijk" = 123, 145, 176, 246, 257, 347, 365, and:
with "e"0 the scalar element, and "i", "j", "k" = 1 ... 7.
The above definition though is not unique, but is only one of 480 possible definitions for octonion multiplication with . The others can be obtained by permuting and changing the signs of the non-scalar basis elements. The 480 different algebras are isomorphic, and there is rarely a need to consider which particular multiplication rule is used. Each of these 480 definitions is invariant up to signs under some 7-cycle of the points (1234567), and for each 7-cycle there are four definitions, differing by signs and reversal of order. A common choice is to use the definition invariant under the 7-cycle (1234567) with as it is particularly easy to remember the multiplication. A variation of this sometimes used is to label the elements of the basis by the elements ∞, 0, 1, 2, ..., 6, of the projective line over the finite field of order 7. The multiplication is then given by and , and all expressions obtained from this by adding a constant (mod 7) to all subscripts: in other words using the 7 triples (124) (235) (346) (450) (561) (602) (013). These are the nonzero codewords of the quadratic residue code of length 7 over the field of 2 elements. There is a symmetry of order 7 given by adding a constant mod 7 to all subscripts, and also a symmetry of order 3 given by multiplying all subscripts by one of the quadratic residues 1, 2, 4 mod 7.
The multiplication table for a Geometric algebra of signature (----) can be given in terms of the following 7 quaternionic triples (omitting the identity element):
(I,j,k), (i,J,k), (i,j,K), (I,J,K), (*I,i,m), (*J,j,m), (*K,k,m) in which the lowercase items are vectors (mathematics and physics) and the uppercase ones are bivectors and *=mijk (which is in fact the Hodge dual operator). If the * is forced to be equal to the identity then the multiplicaton ceases to be associative, but the * may be removed from the multiplication table resulting in an octonion multiplication table.
Note that in keeping *=mijk associative and thus not reducing the 4 dimensional geometric algebra to an octonion one, the whole multiplication table can be derived from the equation for *. Consider the gamma matrices. The formula defining the fifth gamma matrix shows that it is the * of a four dimensional geometric algebra of the gamma matrices.
Cayley–Dickson construction.
A more systematic way of defining the octonions is via the Cayley–Dickson construction. Just as quaternions can be defined as pairs of complex numbers, the octonions can be defined as pairs of quaternions. Addition is defined pairwise. The product of two pairs of quaternions ("a", "b") and ("c", "d") is defined by
where formula_8 denotes the conjugate of the quaternion "z". This definition is equivalent to the one given above when the eight unit octonions are identified with the pairs
Fano plane mnemonic.
A convenient mnemonic for remembering the products of unit octonions is given by the diagram at the right, which represents the multiplication table of Cayley and Graves. This diagram with seven points and seven lines (the circle through 1, 2, and 3 is considered a line) is called the Fano plane. The lines are oriented. The seven points correspond to the seven standard basis elements of Im(O) (see definition below). Each pair of distinct points lies on a unique line and each line runs through exactly three points.
Let ("a", "b", "c") be an ordered triple of points lying on a given line with the order specified by the direction of the arrow. Then multiplication is given by
together with cyclic permutations. These rules together with
completely defines the multiplicative structure of the octonions. Each of the seven lines generates a subalgebra of O isomorphic to the quaternions H.
Conjugate, norm, and inverse.
The "conjugate" of an octonion
is given by
Conjugation is an involution of O and satisfies (note the change in order).
The "real part" of "x" is given by
and the "imaginary part" by
The set of all purely imaginary octonions span a 7 dimension subspace of O, denoted Im(O).
Conjugation of octonions satisfies the equation
The product of an octonion with its conjugate, , is always a nonnegative real number:
Using this the norm of an octonion can be defined, as
This norm agrees with the standard Euclidean norm on R8.
The existence of a norm on O implies the existence of inverses for every nonzero element of O. The inverse of is given by
It satisfies .
Properties.
Octonionic multiplication is neither commutative:
nor associative:
The octonions do satisfy a weaker form of associativity: they are alternative. This means that the subalgebra generated by any two elements is associative. Actually, one can show that the subalgebra generated by any two elements of O is isomorphic to R, C, or H, all of which are associative. Because of their non-associativity, octonions do not have matrix representations, unlike quaternions.
The octonions do retain one important property shared by R, C, and H: the norm on O satisfies
This implies that the octonions form a nonassociative normed division algebra. The higher-dimensional algebras defined by the Cayley–Dickson construction (e.g. the sedenions) all fail to satisfy this property. They all have zero divisors.
Wider number systems exist which have a multiplicative modulus (e.g. 16 dimensional conic sedenions). Their modulus is defined differently from their norm, and they also contain zero divisors.
It turns out that the only normed division algebras over the reals are R, C, H, and O. These four algebras also form the only alternative, finite-dimensional division algebras over the reals (up to isomorphism).
Not being associative, the nonzero elements of O do not form a group. They do, however, form a loop, indeed a Moufang loop.
Commutator and cross product.
The commutator of two octonions "x" and "y" is given by
This is antisymmetric and imaginary. If it is considered only as a product on the imaginary subspace Im(O) it defines a product on that space, the seven-dimensional cross product, given by
Like the cross product in three dimensions this is a vector orthogonal to "x" and "y" with magnitude
But like the octonion product it is not uniquely defined. Instead there are many different cross products, each one dependent on the choice of octonion product.
Automorphisms.
An automorphism, "A", of the octonions is an invertible linear transformation of O which satisfies
The set of all automorphisms of O forms a group called "G"2. The group "G"2 is a simply connected, compact, real Lie group of dimension 14. This group is the smallest of the exceptional Lie groups and is isomorphic to the subgroup of Spin(7) that preserves any chosen particular vector in its 8-dimensional real spinor representation. The group Spin(7) is in turn a subgroup of the group of isotopies described below.
"See also": PSL(2,7) - the automorphism group of the Fano plane.
Isotopies.
An isotopy of an algebra is a triple of bijective linear maps "a", "b", "c" such that if "xy"="z" then "a"("x")"b"("y")="c"("z"). For "a"="b"="c" this is the same as an automorphism. The isotopy group of an algebra is the group of all isotopies, which contains the group of automorphisms as a subgroup.
The isotopy group of the octonions is the group Spin8(R), with "a", "b", and "c" acting as the three 8-dimensional representations. The subgroup of elements where "c" fixes the identity is the subgroup Spin7(R), and the subgroup where "a", "b", and "c" all fix the identity is the automorphism group "G"2.
Integral octonions.
There are several natural ways to choose an integral form of the octonions. The simplest is just to take the octonions whose coordinates are integers. This gives a nonassociative algebra over the integers called the Gravesian octonions. However it is not a maximal order (in the sense of ring theory); there are exactly 7 maximal orders containing it. These 7 maximal orders are all equivalent under automorphisms. The phrase "integral octonions" usually refers to a fixed choice of one of these seven orders.
These maximal orders were constructed by , Dickson and Bruck as follows. Label the 8 basis vectors by the points of the projective plane over the field with 7 elements. First form the "Kirmse integers" : these consist of octonions whose coordinates are integers or half integers, and that are half integers (that is, halves of odd integers) on one of the 16 sets
of the extended quadratic residue code of length 8 over the field of 2 elements, given by ∅, (∞124) and its images under adding a constant mod 7, and the complements of these 8 sets. Then switch infinity and any one other coordinate; this operation creates a bijection of the Kirmse integers onto a different set, which is a maximal order. There are 7 ways to do this, giving 7 maximal orders, which are all equivalent under cyclic permutations of the 7 coordinates 0123456. (Kirmse incorrectly claimed that the Kirmse integers also form a maximal order, so he thought there were 8 maximal orders rather than 7, but as pointed out they are not closed under multiplication; this mistake occurs in several published papers.)
The Kirmse integers and the 7 maximal orders are all isometric to the E8 lattice rescaled by a factor of 1/√2. In particular there are 240 elements of minimum nonzero norm 1 in each of these orders, forming a Moufang loop of order 240.
The integral octonions have a "division with remainder" property: given integral octonions "a" and "b"≠0, we can find "q" and "r" with "a" = "qb" + "r", where the remainder "r" has norm less than that of "b".
In the integral octonions, all left ideals and right ideals are 2-sided ideals, and the only 2-sided ideals are the principal ideals "nO" where "n" is a non-negative integer.
The integral octonions have a version of factorization into primes, though it is not straightforward to state because the octonions are not associative so the product of octonions depends on the order in which one does the products. The irreducible integral octonions are exactly those of prime norm, and every integral octonion can be written as a product of irreducible octonions. More precisely an integral octonion of norm "mn" can be written as a product of integral octonions of norms "m" and "n".
The automorphism group of the integral octonions is the group "G"2(F2) of order 12096, which has a simple subgroup of index 2 isomorphic to the unitary group 2"A"2(32). The isotopy group of the integral octonions is the perfect double cover of the group of rotations of the E8 lattice.

</doc>
<doc id="51438" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51438" title="Hypercomplex number">
Hypercomplex number

In mathematics, a hypercomplex number is a traditional term for an element of a unital algebra over the field of real numbers. 
The study of hypercomplex numbers in the late 19th century forms the basis of modern group representation theory.
History.
In the nineteenth century number systems called quaternions, tessarines, coquaternions, biquaternions, and octonions became established concepts in mathematical literature, added to the real and complex numbers. The concept of a hypercomplex number covered them all, and called for a discipline to explain and classify them.
The cataloguing project began in 1872 when Benjamin Peirce first published his "Linear Associative Algebra", and was carried forward by his son Charles Sanders Peirce. Most significantly, they identified the nilpotent and the idempotent elements as useful hypercomplex numbers for classifications. The Cayley–Dickson construction used involutions to generate complex numbers, quaternions, and octonions out of the real number system. Hurwitz and Frobenius proved theorems that put limits on hypercomplexity: Hurwitz's theorem (normed division algebras), and Frobenius theorem (associative division algebras). Finally in 1958 J. Frank Adams used topological methods to prove that there exist only four finite-dimensional real division algebras: the reals ℝ, the complexes ℂ, the quaternions ℍ, and the octonions 𝕆.
It was matrix algebra that harnessed the hypercomplex systems. First, matrices contributed new hypercomplex numbers like 2 × 2 real matrices. Soon the matrix paradigm began to explain the others as they became represented by matrices and their operations. In 1907 Joseph Wedderburn showed that associative hypercomplex systems could be represented by matrices, or direct sums of systems of matrices. From that date the preferred term for a hypercomplex system became associative algebra as seen in the title of Wedderburn’s thesis at University of Edinburgh. Note however, that non-associative systems like octonions and hyperbolic quaternions represent another type of hypercomplex number. 
As Hawkins explains, the hypercomplex numbers are stepping stones to learning about Lie groups and group representation theory. For instance, in 1929 Emmy Noether wrote on "hypercomplex quantities and representation theory". In 1973 Kantor and Solodovnikov published a textbook on hypercomplex numbers which was translated in 1989. 
Karen Parshall has written a detailed exposition of the heyday of hypercomplex numbers, including the role of such luminaries as Theodor Molien and Eduard Study. For the transition to modern algebra, Bartel van der Waerden devotes thirty pages to hypercomplex numbers in his "History of Algebra".
Definition.
A definition of a hypercomplex number is given by as an element of a finite-dimensional algebra over the real numbers that is unital and distributive (but not necessarily associative). Elements are generated with real number coefficients formula_1 for a basis formula_2. Where possible, it is conventional to choose the basis so that formula_3. A technical approach to hypercomplex numbers directs attention first to those of dimension two.
Two-dimensional real algebras.
Theorem: Up to isomorphism, there are exactly three 2-dimensional unital algebras over the reals: the ordinary complex numbers, the split-complex numbers, and the dual numbers.
for some real numbers "a"0 and "a"1.
Using the common method of completing the square by subtracting "a"1"u" and adding the quadratic complement to both sides yields
The three cases depend on this real value:
The complex numbers are the only two-dimensional hypercomplex algebra that is a field.
Algebras such as the split-complex numbers that include non-real roots of 1 also contain idempotents formula_16 and zero divisors formula_17, so such algebras cannot be division algebras. However, these properties can turn out to be very meaningful, for instance in describing the Lorentz transformations of special relativity.
In a 2004 edition of Mathematics Magazine the two-dimensional real algebras have been styled the "generalized complex numbers". The idea of cross-ratio of four complex numbers can be extended to the two-dimensional real algebras.
Higher-dimensional examples (more than one non-real axis).
Clifford algebras.
A Clifford algebra is the unital associative algebra generated over an underlying vector space equipped with a quadratic form. Over the real numbers this is equivalent to being able to define a symmetric scalar product, "u"⋅"v" = ½("uv" + "vu") that can be used to orthogonalise the quadratic form, to give a set of bases {"e"1, ..., "e""k"} such that:
Imposing closure under multiplication generates a multivector space spanned by a basis of 2"k" elements, {1, "e"1, "e"2, "e"3, ..., "e"1"e"2, ..., "e"1"e"2"e"3, ...}. These can be interpreted as the basis of a hypercomplex number system. Unlike the basis {"e"1, ..., "e""k"}, the remaining basis elements may or may not anti-commute, depending on how many simple exchanges must be carried out to swap the two factors. So , but .
Putting aside the bases for which (i.e. directions in the original space over which the quadratic form was degenerate), the remaining Clifford algebras can be identified by the label "C"ℓ"p","q"(R), indicating that the algebra is constructed from "p" simple basis elements with , "q" with , and where R indicates that this is to be a Clifford algebra over the reals—i.e. coefficients of elements of the algebra are to be real numbers.
These algebras, called geometric algebras, form a systematic set, which turn out to be very useful in physics problems which involve rotations, phases, or spins, notably in classical and quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory and relativity.
Examples include: the complex numbers "C"ℓ0,1(R), split-complex numbers "C"ℓ1,0(R), quaternions "C"ℓ0,2(R), split-biquaternions "C"ℓ0,3(R), coquaternions (the natural algebra of two-dimensional space); "C"ℓ3,0(R) (the natural algebra of three-dimensional space, and the algebra of the Pauli matrices); and the spacetime algebra "C"ℓ1,3(R).
The elements of the algebra "C"ℓ"p","q"(R) form an even subalgebra "C"ℓ0"q"+1,"p"(R) of the algebra "C"ℓ"q"+1,"p"(R), which can be used to parametrise rotations in the larger algebra. There is thus a close connection between complex numbers and rotations in two-dimensional space; between quaternions and rotations in three-dimensional space; between split-complex numbers and (hyperbolic) rotations (Lorentz transformations) in 1+1-dimensional space, and so on.
Whereas Cayley–Dickson and split-complex constructs with eight or more dimensions are not associative with respect to multiplication, Clifford algebras retain associativity at any number of dimensions.
In 1995 Ian R. Porteous wrote on "The recognition of subalgebras" in his book on Clifford algebras. His Proposition 11.4 summarizes the hypercomplex cases:
For extension beyond the classical algebras, see Classification of Clifford algebras.
Cayley–Dickson construction.
All of the Clifford algebras "C"ℓ"p","q"(R) apart from the real numbers, complex numbers and the quaternions contain non-real elements that square to +1; and so cannot be division algebras. A different approach to extending the complex numbers is taken by the Cayley–Dickson construction. This generates number systems of dimension 2"n", "n" = 2, 3, 4, ..., with bases formula_23, where all the non-real basis elements anti-commute and satisfy formula_24. In 8 or more dimensions (n ≥ 3) these algebras are non-associative. In 16 or more dimensions (n ≥ 4) these algebras also have zero-divisors.
The first algebras in this sequence are the four-dimensional quaternions, eight-dimensional octonions, and 16-dimensional sedenions. An algebraic symmetry is lost with each increase in dimensionality: quaternion multiplication is not commutative, octonion multiplication is non-associative, and the norm of sedenions is not multiplicative.
The Cayley–Dickson construction can be modified by inserting an extra sign at some stages. It then generates the "split algebras" in the collection of composition algebras instead of the division algebras: 
Unlike the complex numbers, the split-complex numbers are not algebraically closed, and further contain zero divisors and non-trivial idempotents. As with the quaternions, split-quaternions are not commutative, but further contain nilpotents; they are isomorphic to the 2 × 2 real matrices. Split-octonions are non-associative and contain nilpotents.
Tensor products.
The tensor product of any two algebras is another algebra, which can be used to produce many more examples of hypercomplex number systems.
In particular taking tensor products with the complex numbers (considered as algebras over the reals) leads to four-dimensional tessarines formula_32, eight-dimensional biquaternions formula_33, and 16-dimensional complex octonions formula_34.

</doc>
<doc id="51440" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51440" title="Quaternion">
Quaternion

In mathematics, the quaternions are a number system that extends the complex numbers. They were first described by Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton in 1843 and applied to mechanics in three-dimensional space. A feature of quaternions is that multiplication of two quaternions is noncommutative. Hamilton defined a quaternion as the quotient of two directed lines in a three-dimensional space or equivalently as the quotient of two vectors.
Quaternions find uses in both theoretical and applied mathematics, in particular for calculations involving three-dimensional rotations such as in three-dimensional computer graphics, computer vision and crystallographic texture analysis. In practical applications, they can be used alongside other methods, such as Euler angles and rotation matrices, or as an alternative to them, depending on the application.
In modern mathematical language, quaternions form a four-dimensional associative normed division algebra over the real numbers, and therefore also a domain. In fact, the quaternions were the first noncommutative division algebra to be discovered. The algebra of quaternions is often denoted by H (for "Hamilton"), or in blackboard bold by formula_1 (Unicode U+210D, ℍ). It can also be given by the Clifford algebra classifications . The algebra H holds a special place in analysis since, according to the Frobenius theorem, it is one of only two finite-dimensional division rings containing the real numbers as a proper subring, the other being the complex numbers. These rings are also Euclidean Hurwitz algebras, of which quaternions are the largest associative algebra.
The unit quaternions can be thought of as a choice of a group structure on the 3-sphere S3 that gives the group Spin(3), which is isomorphic to SU(2) and also to the universal cover of SO(3).
History.
Quaternion algebra was introduced by Hamilton in 1843. Important precursors to this work included Euler's four-square identity (1748) and Olinde Rodrigues' parameterization of general rotations by four parameters (1840), but neither of these writers treated the four-parameter rotations as an algebra. Carl Friedrich Gauss had also discovered quaternions in 1819, but this work was not published until 1900.
Hamilton knew that the complex numbers could be interpreted as points in a plane, and he was looking for a way to do the same for points in three-dimensional space. Points in space can be represented by their coordinates, which are triples of numbers, and for many years he had known how to add and subtract triples of numbers. However, Hamilton had been stuck on the problem of multiplication and division for a long time. He could not figure out how to calculate the quotient of the coordinates of two points in space.
The great breakthrough in quaternions finally came on Monday 16 October 1843 in Dublin, when Hamilton was on his way to the Royal Irish Academy where he was going to preside at a council meeting. As he walked along the towpath of the Royal Canal with his wife, the concepts behind quaternions were taking shape in his mind. When the answer dawned on him, Hamilton could not resist the urge to carve the formula for the quaternions,
into the stone of Brougham Bridge as he paused on it.
On the following day, Hamilton wrote a letter to his friend and fellow mathematician, John T. Graves, describing the train of thought that led to his discovery. This letter was later published in the "London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science", vol. xxv (1844), pp 489–95. In the letter, Hamilton states,
Hamilton called a quadruple with these rules of multiplication a "quaternion", and he devoted most of the remainder of his life to studying and teaching them. Hamilton's treatment is more geometric than the modern approach, which emphasizes quaternions' algebraic properties. He founded a school of "quaternionists", and he tried to popularize quaternions in several books. The last and longest of his books, "Elements of Quaternions", was 800 pages long; it was published shortly after his death.
After Hamilton's death, his student Peter Tait continued promoting quaternions. At this time, quaternions were a mandatory examination topic in Dublin. Topics in physics and geometry that would now be described using vectors, such as kinematics in space and Maxwell's equations, were described entirely in terms of quaternions. There was even a professional research association, the Quaternion Society, devoted to the study of quaternions and other hypercomplex number systems.
From the mid-1880s, quaternions began to be displaced by vector analysis, which had been developed by Josiah Willard Gibbs, Oliver Heaviside, and Hermann von Helmholtz. Vector analysis described the same phenomena as quaternions, so it borrowed some ideas and terminology liberally from the literature of quaternions. However, vector analysis was conceptually simpler and notationally cleaner, and eventually quaternions were relegated to a minor role in mathematics and physics. A side-effect of this transition is that Hamilton's work is difficult to comprehend for many modern readers. Hamilton's original definitions are unfamiliar and his writing style was wordy and difficult to understand.
However, quaternions have had a revival since the late 20th century, primarily due to their utility in describing spatial rotations. The representations of rotations by quaternions are more compact and quicker to compute than the representations by matrices. In addition, unlike Euler angles they are not susceptible to gimbal lock. For this reason, quaternions are used in computer graphics,"Tomb Raider" (1996) is often cited as the first mass-market computer game to have used quaternions to achieve smooth three-dimensional rotations. See, for example, Nick Bobick's, "Rotating Objects Using Quaternions", "Game Developer" magazine, July 1998</ref> computer vision, robotics, control theory, signal processing, attitude control, physics, bioinformatics, molecular dynamics, computer simulations, and orbital mechanics. For example, it is common for the attitude control systems of spacecraft to be commanded in terms of quaternions. Quaternions have received another boost from number theory because of their relationships with the quadratic forms.
Since 1989, the Department of Mathematics of the National University of Ireland, Maynooth has organized a pilgrimage, where scientists (including the physicists Murray Gell-Mann in 2002, Steven Weinberg in 2005, and the mathematician Andrew Wiles in 2003) take a walk from Dunsink Observatory to the Royal Canal bridge. Hamilton's carving is no longer visible.
Impact on physics.
P.R. Girard’s essay "The quaternion group and modern physics" discusses some roles of quaternions in physics. It "shows how various physical covariance groups: SO(3), the Lorentz group, the general relativity group, the Clifford algebra SU(2), and the conformal group can be readily related to the quaternion group" in modern algebra. Girard began by discussing group representations and by representing some space groups of crystallography. He proceeded to kinematics of rigid body motion. Next he used complex quaternions (biquaternions) to represent the Lorentz group of special relativity, including the Thomas precession. He cited five authors, beginning with Ludwik Silberstein, who used a potential function of one quaternion variable to express Maxwell's equations in a single differential equation. Concerning general relativity, he expressed the Runge–Lenz vector. He mentioned the Clifford biquaternions (split-biquaternions) as an instance of Clifford algebra. Finally, invoking the reciprocal of a biquaternion, Girard described conformal maps on spacetime. Among the fifty references, Girard included Alexander Macfarlane and his "Bulletin" of the Quaternion Society. In 1999 he showed how Einstein's equations of general relativity could be formulated within a Clifford algebra that is directly linked to quaternions.
A more personal view of quaternions was written by Joachim Lambek in 1995. He wrote in his essay "If Hamilton had prevailed: quaternions in physics": "My own interest as a graduate student was raised by the inspiring book by Silberstein". He concluded by stating "I firmly believe that quaternions can supply a shortcut for pure mathematicians who wish to familiarize themselves with certain aspects of theoretical physics."
Definition.
As a set, the quaternions H may be identified with R4, a four-dimensional vector space over the real numbers. H has three operations: addition, scalar multiplication, and quaternion multiplication. The sum of two elements of H is defined to be their sum as elements of R4. Similarly the product of an element of H by a real number is defined to be the same as the product by a scalar in R4. To define the product of two elements in H requires a choice of basis for R4. The elements of this basis are customarily denoted as 1, "i", "j", and "k". Every element of H can be uniquely written as a linear combination of these basis elements, that is, as , where "a", "b", "c", and "d" are real numbers. The basis element 1 will be the identity element of H, meaning that multiplication by 1 does nothing, and for this reason, elements of H are usually written , suppressing the basis element 1. Given this basis, associative quaternion multiplication is defined by first defining the products of basis elements and then defining all other products using the distributive law.
Multiplication of basis elements.
The identities
where "i", "j", and "k" are basis elements of H, determine all the possible products of "i", "j", and "k".
For example, right-multiplying both sides of by "k" gives
All the other possible products can be determined by similar methods, resulting in
which can be expressed as a table whose rows represent the left factor of the product and whose columns represent the right factor, as shown at the top of this article.
Noncommutativity of multiplication.
Unlike multiplication of real or complex numbers, multiplication of quaternions is not commutative. For example, , while . The noncommutativity of multiplication has some unexpected consequences, among them that polynomial equations over the quaternions can have more distinct solutions than the degree of the polynomial. The equation , for instance, has infinitely many quaternion solutions with , so that these solutions lie on the two-dimensional surface of a sphere centered on zero in the three-dimensional subspace of quaternions with zero real part. This sphere intersects the complex plane at two points and .
The fact that quaternion multiplication is not commutative makes the quaternions an often-cited example of a strictly skew field.
Hamilton product.
For two elements and , their product, called the Hamilton product () (), is determined by the products of the basis elements and the distributive law. The distributive law makes it possible to expand the product so that it is a sum of products of basis elements. This gives the following expression:
Now the basis elements can be multiplied using the rules given above to get:
The product of two rotation quaternions will be equivalent to the rotation followed by the rotation .
Ordered list form.
Using the basis 1, "i", "j", "k" of H makes it possible to write H as a set of quadruples:
Then the basis elements are:
and the formulas for addition and multiplication are:
Scalar and vector parts.
A number of the form , where "a" is a real number, is called real, and a number of the form , where "b", "c", and "d" are real numbers, and at least one of "b", "c" or "d" is nonzero, is called pure imaginary. If is any quaternion, then "a" is called its scalar part and "bi" + "cj" + "dk" is called its vector part. The scalar part of a quaternion is always real, and the vector part is always pure imaginary. Even though every quaternion can be viewed as a vector in a four-dimensional vector space, it is common to define a vector to mean a pure imaginary quaternion. With this convention, a vector is the same as an element of the vector space R3.
It is important to note, however, that the vector part of a quaternion is, in truth, an "axial" vector or "pseudovector", "not" an ordinary or "polar" vector, as was formally proven by S.L. Altmann in Ch. 12 of his 1986 book, "Rotations, Quaternions and Double Groups". A polar vector can be represented in calculations (for example, when rotated by a quaternion "similarity transform") by a pure imaginary quaternion, with no loss of information, but the two should not be confused. The axis of a "binary" (180°) rotation quaternion corresponds to the direction of the represented polar vector in such a case.
Hamilton called pure imaginary quaternions right quaternions and real numbers (considered as quaternions with zero vector part) scalar quaternions.
If a quaternion is divided up into a scalar part and a vector part, i.e.
then the formulas for addition and multiplication are:
where "·" is the dot product and "×" is the cross product.
Conjugation, the norm, and reciprocal.
Conjugation of quaternions is analogous to conjugation of complex numbers and to transposition (also known as reversal) of elements of Clifford algebras. To define it, let formula_20 be a quaternion. The conjugate of "q" is the quaternion formula_21. It is denoted by "q"∗, , "qt", or formula_22. Conjugation is an involution, meaning that it is its own inverse, so conjugating an element twice returns the original element. The conjugate of a product of two quaternions is the product of the conjugates "in the reverse order". That is, if "p" and "q" are quaternions, then , not "p"∗"q"∗.
Unlike the situation in the complex plane,
the conjugation of a quaternion can be expressed entirely with multiplication and addition:
Conjugation can be used to extract the scalar and vector parts of a quaternion. The scalar part of "p" is , and the vector part of "p" is .
The square root of the product of a quaternion with its conjugate is called its norm and is denoted ||"q"|| (Hamilton called this quantity the "tensor" of "q", but this conflicts with modern meaning of "tensor"). In formula, this is expressed as follows:
This is always a non-negative real number, and it is the same as the Euclidean norm on H considered as the vector space R4. Multiplying a quaternion by a real number scales its norm by the absolute value of the number. That is, if α is real, then
This is a special case of the fact that the norm is "multiplicative", meaning that
for any two quaternions "p" and "q". Multiplicativity is a consequence of the formula for the conjugate of a product.
Alternatively it follows from the identity
(where "i" denotes the usual imaginary unit) and hence from the multiplicative property of determinants of square matrices.
This norm makes it possible to define the distance between "p" and "q" as the norm of their difference:
This makes H into a metric space. Addition and multiplication are continuous in the metric topology. Indeed, for any scalar, positive "a" it holds
The continuity follows for vanishing "a". Similarly for the multiplication.
Unit quaternion.
A unit quaternion is a quaternion of norm one. Dividing a non-zero quaternion "q" by its norm produces a unit quaternion U"q" called the versor of "q":
Every quaternion has a polar decomposition .
Using conjugation and the norm makes it possible to define the reciprocal of a non-zero quaternion. The product of a quaternion with its reciprocal should equal 1, and the considerations above imply that the product of formula_31 and formula_32 (in either order) is 1. So the reciprocal of "q" is defined to be
This makes it possible to divide two quaternions "p" and "q" in two different ways (when q is non-zero). That is, their quotient can be either "p q"−1 or "q"−1"p". The notation is ambiguous because it does not specify whether "q" divides on the left or the right.
Algebraic properties.
The set H of all quaternions is a vector space over the real numbers with dimension 4. (In comparison, the real numbers have dimension 1, the complex numbers have dimension 2, and the octonions have dimension 8.) Multiplication of quaternions is associative and distributes over vector addition, but it is not commutative. Therefore, the quaternions H are a non-commutative associative algebra over the real numbers. Even though H contains copies of the complex numbers, it is not an associative algebra over the complex numbers.
Because it is possible to divide quaternions, they form a division algebra. This is a structure similar to a field except for the non-commutativity of multiplication. Finite-dimensional associative division algebras over the real numbers are very rare. The Frobenius theorem states that there are exactly three: R, C, and H. The norm makes the quaternions into a normed algebra, and normed division algebras over the reals are also very rare: Hurwitz's theorem says that there are only four: R, C, H, and O (the octonions). The quaternions are also an example of a composition algebra and of a unital Banach algebra.
Because the product of any two basis vectors is plus or minus another basis vector, the set forms a group under multiplication. This non-Abelian Group is called the quaternion group and is denoted Q8. The real group ring of Q8 is a ring Rwhich is also an eight-dimensional vector space over R. It has one basis vector for each element of Q8. The quaternions are the quotient ring of R[Q8 by the ideal generated by the elements , , , and . Here the first term in each of the differences is one of the basis elements 1, "i", "j", and "k", and the second term is one of basis elements −1, −"i", −"j", and −"k", not the additive inverses of 1, "i", "j", and "k".
Quaternions and the geometry of R3.
Because the vector part of a quaternion is a vector in R3, the geometry of R3 is reflected in the algebraic structure of the quaternions. Many operations on vectors can be defined in terms of quaternions, and this makes it possible to apply quaternion techniques wherever spatial vectors arise. For instance, this is true in electrodynamics and 3D computer graphics.
For the remainder of this section, "i", "j", and "k" will denote both imaginary basis vectors of H and a basis for R3. Notice that replacing "i" by −"i", "j" by −"j", and "k" by −"k" sends a vector to its additive inverse, so the additive inverse of a vector is the same as its conjugate as a quaternion. For this reason, conjugation is sometimes called the "spatial inverse".
Choose two imaginary quaternions and . Their dot product is
This is equal to the scalar parts of "pq"∗, "qp"∗, "p"∗"q", and "q"∗"p". (Note that the vector parts of these four products are different.) It also has the formulas
The cross product of "p" and "q" relative to the orientation determined by the ordered basis "i", "j", and "k" is
(Recall that the orientation is necessary to determine the sign.) This is equal to the vector part of the product "pq" (as quaternions), as well as the vector part of −"q"∗"p"∗. It also has the formula
For the commutator, ["p", "q"] = "pq" − "qp", of two imaginary quaternions one obtains
In general, let "p" and "q" be quaternions (possibly non-imaginary), and write
where "ps" and "qs" are the scalar parts, and formula_41 and formula_42 are the vector parts of "p" and "q". Then we have the formula
This shows that the noncommutativity of quaternion multiplication comes from the multiplication of pure imaginary quaternions. It also shows that two quaternions commute if and only if their vector parts are collinear.
For further elaboration on modeling three-dimensional vectors using quaternions, see quaternions and spatial rotation.
A possible visualisation was introduced by Andrew J. Hanson.
Matrix representations.
Just as complex numbers can be represented as matrices, so can quaternions. There are at least two ways of representing quaternions as matrices in such a way that quaternion addition and multiplication correspond to matrix addition and matrix multiplication. One is to use 2 × 2 complex matrices, and the other is to use 4 × 4 real matrices. In each case, the representation given is one of a family of linearly related representations. In the terminology of abstract algebra, these are injective homomorphisms from H to the matrix rings and , respectively.
Using 2 × 2 complex matrices, the quaternion can be represented as
This representation has the following properties:
Using 4 × 4 real matrices, that same quaternion can be written as
where the skew-symmetric matrices are not unique. In fact, there exist 48 distinct ordered sets of such matrices. 
In this representation, the conjugate of a quaternion corresponds to the transpose of the matrix. The fourth power of the norm of a quaternion is the determinant of the corresponding matrix. As with the 2 × 2 complex representation above, complex numbers can again be produced by constraining the coefficients suitably; for example, as block diagonal matrices with two 2 × 2 blocks by setting .
Sums of four squares.
Quaternions are also used in one of the proofs of Lagrange's four-square theorem in number theory, which states that every nonnegative integer is the sum of four integer squares. As well as being an elegant theorem in its own right, Lagrange's four square theorem has useful applications in areas of mathematics outside number theory, such as combinatorial design theory. The quaternion-based proof uses Hurwitz quaternions, a subring of the ring of all quaternions for which there is an analog of the Euclidean algorithm.
Quaternions as pairs of complex numbers.
Quaternions can be represented as pairs of complex numbers. From this perspective, quaternions are the result of applying the Cayley–Dickson construction to the complex numbers. This is a generalization of the construction of the complex numbers as pairs of real numbers.
Let C2 be a two-dimensional vector space over the complex numbers. Choose a basis consisting of two elements 1 and "j". A vector in C2 can be written in terms of the basis elements 1 and "j" as
If we define and , then we can multiply two vectors using the distributive law. Writing "k" in place of the product "ij" leads to the same rules for multiplication as the usual quaternions. Therefore, the above vector of complex numbers corresponds to the quaternion . If we write the elements of C2 as ordered pairs and quaternions as quadruples, then the correspondence is
Square roots of −1.
In the complex numbers, there are just two numbers, "i" and −"i", whose square is −1 . In H there are infinitely many square roots of minus one: the quaternion solution for the square root of −1 is the unit sphere in R3. To see this, let be a quaternion, and assume that its square is −1. In terms of "a", "b", "c", and "d", this means
To satisfy the last three equations, either or "b", "c", and "d" are all 0. The latter is impossible because "a" is a real number and the first equation would imply that . Therefore, and . In other words, a quaternion squares to −1 if and only if it is a vector (that is, pure imaginary) with norm 1. By definition, the set of all such vectors forms the unit sphere.
Only negative real quaternions have an infinite number of square roots. All others have just two (or one in the case of 0).
The identification of the square roots of minus one in H was given by Hamilton but was frequently omitted in other texts. By 1971 the sphere was included by Sam Perlis in his three-page exposition included in "Historical Topics in Algebra" (page 39) published by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. More recently, the sphere of square roots of minus one is described in Ian R. Porteous's book "Clifford Algebras and the Classical Groups" (Cambridge, 1995) in proposition 8.13 on page 60.
H as a union of complex planes.
Each pair of square roots of −1 creates a distinct copy of the complex numbers inside the quaternions. If , then the copy is determined by the function
In the language of abstract algebra, each is an injective ring homomorphism from C to H. The images of the embeddings corresponding to "q" and −"q" are identical.
Every non-real quaternion lies in a subspace of H isomorphic to C. Write "q" as the sum of its scalar part and its vector part:
Decompose the vector part further as the product of its norm and its versor:
(Note that this is not the same as formula_55.) The versor of the vector part of "q", formula_56, is a pure imaginary unit quaternion, so its square is −1. Therefore, it determines a copy of the complex numbers by the function
Under this function, is the image of the complex number formula_58. Thus H is the union of complex planes intersecting in a common real line, where the union is taken over the sphere of square roots of minus one, bearing in mind that the same plane is associated with the antipodal points of the sphere.
Commutative subrings.
The relationship of quaternions to each other within the complex subplanes of H can also be identified and expressed in terms of commutative subrings. Specifically, since two quaternions "p" and "q" commute () only if they lie in the same complex subplane of H, the profile of H as a union of complex planes arises when one seeks to find all commutative subrings of the quaternion ring. This method of commutative subrings is also used to profile the coquaternions and 2 × 2 real matrices.
Functions of a quaternion variable.
Like functions of a complex variable, functions of a quaternion variable suggest useful physical models. For example, the original electric and magnetic fields described by Maxwell were functions of a quaternion variable.
Exponential, logarithm, and power.
Given a quaternion,
the exponential is computed as
and
It follows that the polar decomposition of a quaternion may be written
where the angle formula_63 and the unit vector formula_64 are defined by:
and
Any unit quaternion may be expressed in polar form as formula_67.
The power of a quaternion raised to an arbitrary (real) exponent formula_68 is given by:
Three-dimensional and four-dimensional rotation groups.
The term "conjugation", besides the meaning given above, can also mean taking an element "a" to "rar"−1 where "r" is some non-zero element (quaternion). All elements that are conjugate to a given element (in this sense of the word conjugate) have the same real part and the same norm of the vector part. (Thus the conjugate in the other sense is one of the conjugates in this sense.)
Thus the multiplicative group of non-zero quaternions acts by conjugation on the copy of R3 consisting of quaternions with real part equal to zero. Conjugation by a unit quaternion (a quaternion of absolute value 1) with real part cos(θ) is a rotation by an angle 2θ, the axis of the rotation being the direction of the imaginary part. The advantages of quaternions are:
The set of all unit quaternions (versors) forms a 3-sphere "S"3 and a group (a Lie group) under multiplication, double covering the group of real orthogonal 3×3 matrices of determinant 1 since "two" unit quaternions correspond to every rotation under the above correspondence.
The image of a subgroup of versors is a point group, and conversely, the preimage of a point group is a subgroup of versors. The preimage of a finite point group is called by the same name, with the prefix binary. For instance, the preimage of the icosahedral group is the binary icosahedral group.
The versors' group is isomorphic to SU(2), the group of complex unitary 2×2 matrices of determinant 1.
Let "A" be the set of quaternions of the form where "a", "b", "c", and "d" are either all integers or all rational numbers with odd numerator and denominator 2. The set "A" is a ring (in fact a domain) and a lattice and is called the ring of Hurwitz quaternions. There are 24 unit quaternions in this ring, and they are the vertices of a 24-cell regular polytope with Schläfli symbol {3,4,3}.
Generalizations.
If "F" is any field with characteristic different from 2, and "a" and "b" are elements of "F", one may define a four-dimensional unitary associative algebra over "F" with basis 1, "i", "j", and "ij", where , and (so ). These algebras are called "quaternion algebras" and are isomorphic to the algebra of 2×2 matrices over "F" or form division algebras over "F", depending on 
the choice of "a" and "b".
Quaternions as the even part of Cℓ3,0(R).
The usefulness of quaternions for geometrical computations can be generalised to other dimensions, by identifying the quaternions as the even part Cℓ+3,0(R) of the Clifford algebra Cℓ3,0(R). This is an associative multivector algebra built up from fundamental basis elements σ1, σ2, σ3 using the product rules
If these fundamental basis elements are taken to represent vectors in 3D space, then it turns out that the "reflection" of a vector "r" in a plane perpendicular to a unit vector "w" can be written:
Two reflections make a rotation by an angle twice the angle between the two reflection planes, so
corresponds to a rotation of 180° in the plane containing σ1 and σ2. This is very similar to the corresponding quaternion formula,
In fact, the two are identical, if we make the identification
and it is straightforward to confirm that this preserves the Hamilton relations
In this picture, quaternions correspond not to vectors but to bivectors – quantities with magnitude and orientations associated with particular 2D "planes" rather than 1D "directions". The relation to complex numbers becomes clearer, too: in 2D, with two vector directions σ1 and σ2, there is only one bivector basis element σ1σ2, so only one imaginary. But in 3D, with three vector directions, there are three bivector basis elements σ1σ2, σ2σ3, σ3σ1, so three imaginaries.
This reasoning extends further. In the Clifford algebra Cℓ4,0(R), there are six bivector basis elements, since with four different basic vector directions, six different pairs and therefore six different linearly independent planes can be defined. Rotations in such spaces using these generalisations of quaternions, called rotors, can be very useful for applications involving homogeneous coordinates. But it is only in 3D that the number of basis bivectors equals the number of basis vectors, and each bivector can be identified as a pseudovector.
Dorst "et al." identify the following advantages for placing quaternions in this wider setting:
For further detail about the geometrical uses of Clifford algebras, see Geometric algebra.
Brauer group.
The quaternions are "essentially" the only (non-trivial) central simple algebra (CSA) over the real numbers, in the sense that every CSA over the reals is Brauer equivalent to either the reals or the quaternions. Explicitly, the Brauer group of the reals consists of two classes, represented by the reals and the quaternions, where the Brauer group is the set of all CSAs, up to equivalence relation of one CSA being a matrix ring over another. By the Artin–Wedderburn theorem (specifically, Wedderburn's part), CSAs are all matrix algebras over a division algebra, and thus the quaternions are the only non-trivial division algebra over the reals.
CSAs – rings over a field, which are simple algebras (have no non-trivial 2-sided ideals, just as with fields) whose center is exactly the field – are a noncommutative analog of extension fields, and are more restrictive than general ring extensions. The fact that the quaternions are the only non-trivial CSA over the reals (up to equivalence) may be compared with the fact that the complex numbers are the only non-trivial field extension of the reals.

</doc>
<doc id="51441" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51441" title="Zero divisor">
Zero divisor

In abstract algebra, an element of a ring is called a left zero divisor if there exists a nonzero such that , or equivalently if the map from to that sends to is not injective. Similarly, an element of a ring is called a right zero divisor if there exists a nonzero such that . This is a partial case of divisibility in rings. An element that is a left or a right zero divisor is simply called a zero divisor. An element  that is both a left and a right zero divisor is called a two-sided zero divisor (the nonzero such that may be different from the nonzero such that ). If the ring is commutative, then the left and right zero divisors are the same.
An element of a ring that is not a zero divisor is called regular, or a non-zero-divisor. A zero divisor that is nonzero is called a nonzero zero divisor or a nontrivial zero divisor.
Zero as a zero divisor.
There is no need for a separate convention regarding the case , because the definition applies also in this case: 
Such properties are needed in order to make the following general statements true:
Some references choose to exclude 0 as a zero divisor by convention, but then they must introduce exceptions in the two general statements just made.
Zero divisor on a module.
Let be a commutative ring, let be an -module, and let be an element of . One says that is -regular if the multiplication by map formula_42 is injective, and that is a zero divisor on otherwise. The set of -regular elements is a multiplicative set in .
Specializing the definitions of "-regular" and "zero divisor on " to the case = recovers the definitions of "regular" and "zero divisor" given earlier in this article.

</doc>
<doc id="51442" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51442" title="Zorn's lemma">
Zorn's lemma

Zorn's lemma, also known as the Kuratowski–Zorn lemma, after mathematicians Max Zorn and Kazimierz Kuratowski, is a proposition of set theory that states that a partially ordered set containing upper bounds for every chain (that is, every totally ordered subset) necessarily contains at least one maximal element. 
Proved by Kuratowski in 1922 and independently by Zorn in 1935, this lemma occurs in the proofs of several theorems of crucial importance, for instance the Hahn–Banach theorem in functional analysis, the theorem that every vector space has a basis, Tychonoff's theorem in topology stating that every product of compact spaces is compact, and the theorems in abstract algebra that every nonzero ring has a maximal ideal and that every field has an algebraic closure.
Zorn's lemma is equivalent to the well-ordering theorem and the axiom of choice, in the sense that any one of them, together with the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms of set theory, is sufficient to prove the others. An earlier formulation of Zorn's lemma is Hausdorff's maximum principle which states that every totally ordered subset of a given partially ordered set is contained in a maximal totally ordered subset of that partially ordered set.
Background.
Zorn's lemma can be stated as:
Suppose a partially ordered set "P" has the property that every chain has an upper bound in "P". Then the set "P" contains at least one maximal element.
The terms partially ordered set, chain, upper bound and maximal element used in the statement of the lemma are defined as follows.
Empty chain as boundary case.
In the formulation of Zorn's lemma above, the partially ordered set "P" is not explicitly required to be non-empty.
However, the empty set is a chain (trivially), hence is required to have an upper bound, thus exhibiting at least one element of "P".
An equivalent formulation of the lemma is therefore:
Suppose a non-empty partially ordered set "P" has the property that every non-empty chain has an upper bound in "P". Then the set "P" contains at least one maximal element.
The distinction may seem subtle, but proofs involving Zorn's lemma often involve taking a union of some sort to produce an upper bound.
The case of an empty chain, hence empty union is a boundary case that is easily overlooked.
Example application.
Zorn's lemma can be used to show that every nontrivial ring "R" with unity contains a maximal ideal. In the terminology above, the set "P" consists of all (two-sided) ideals in "R" except "R" itself, which is not empty since it contains at least the trivial ideal {0}. This set is partially ordered by set inclusion. Finding a maximal ideal is the same as finding a maximal element in "P". The ideal "R" was excluded because maximal ideals by definition are not equal to "R".
To apply Zorn's lemma, take a non-empty totally ordered subset "T" of "P". It is necessary to show that "T" has an upper bound, that is, there exists an ideal "I" ⊆ "R" which is bigger than all members of "T" but still smaller than "R" (otherwise it would not be in "P"). Take "I" to be the union of all the ideals in "T". Because "T" contains at least one element, and that element contains at least 0, the union "I" contains at least 0 and is not empty. To prove that "I" is an ideal, note that if "a" and "b" are elements of "I", then there exist two ideals "J", "K" ∈ "T" such that "a" is an element of "J" and "b" is an element of "K". Since "T" is totally ordered, we know that "J" ⊆ "K" or "K" ⊆ "J". In the first case, both "a" and "b" are members of the ideal "K", therefore their sum "a" + "b" is a member of "K", which shows that "a" + "b" is a member of "I". In the second case, both "a" and "b" are members of the ideal "J", and thus "a" + "b" ∈ "I". Furthermore, if "r" ∈ "R", then "ar" and "ra" are elements of "J" and hence elements of "I". Thus, "I" is an ideal in "R".
Now, an ideal is equal to "R" if and only if it contains 1. (It is clear that if it is equal to "R", then it must contain 1; on the other hand, if it contains 1 and "r" is an arbitrary element of "R", then "r1" = "r" is an element of the ideal, and so the ideal is equal to "R".) So, if "I" were equal to "R", then it would contain 1, and that means one of the members of "T" would contain 1 and would thus be equal to "R" – but "R" is explicitly excluded from "P".
The condition of Zorn's lemma has been checked, and thus there is a maximal element in "P", in other words a maximal ideal in "R".
Note that the proof depends on the fact that our ring "R" has a multiplicative unit 1. Without this, the proof wouldn't work and indeed the statement would be false. For example, the ring with formula_1 as additive group and trivial multiplication (i. e. formula_2 for all formula_3) has no maximal ideal (and of course no 1): Its ideals are precisely the additive subgroups. The factor group formula_4 by a proper subgroup formula_5 is a divisible group, hence certainly not finitely generated, hence has a proper non-trivial subgroup, which gives rise to a subgroup and ideal containing formula_5.
Proof sketch.
A sketch of the proof of Zorn's lemma follows, assuming the axiom of choice. Suppose the lemma is false. Then there exists a partially ordered set, or poset, "P" such that every totally ordered subset has an upper bound, and every element has a bigger one. For every totally ordered subset "T" we may then define a bigger element "b"("T"), because "T" has an upper bound, and that upper bound has a bigger element. To actually define the function "b", we need to employ the axiom of choice.
Using the function "b", we are going to define elements "a"0 < "a"1 < "a"2 < "a"3 < ... in "P". This sequence is really long: the indices are not just the natural numbers, but all ordinals. In fact, the sequence is too long for the set "P"; there are too many ordinals (a proper class), more than there are elements in any set, and the set "P" will be exhausted before long and then we will run into the desired contradiction.
The "ai" are defined by transfinite recursion: we pick "a"0 in "P" arbitrary (this is possible, since "P" contains an upper bound for the empty set and is thus not empty) and for any other ordinal "w" we set "a""w" = "b"({"a""v": "v" < "w"}). Because the "a""v" are totally ordered, this is a well-founded definition.
This proof shows that actually a slightly stronger version of Zorn's lemma is true:
History.
The Hausdorff maximal principle is an early statement similar to Zorn's lemma.
Kazimierz Kuratowski proved in 1922 a version of the lemma close to its modern formulation (it applied to sets ordered by inclusion and closed under unions of well-ordered chains). Essentially the same formulation (weakened by using arbitrary chains, not just well-ordered) was independently given by Max Zorn in 1935, who proposed it as a new axiom of set theory replacing the well-ordering theorem, exhibited some of its applications in algebra, and promised to show its equivalence with the axiom of choice in another paper, which never appeared.
The name "Zorn's lemma" appears to be due to John Tukey, who used it in his book "Convergence and Uniformity in Topology" in 1940. Bourbaki's "Théorie des Ensembles" of 1939 refers to a similar maximal principle as "le théorème de Zorn". The name "Kuratowski–Zorn lemma" prevails in Poland and Russia.
Equivalent forms of Zorn's lemma.
Zorn's lemma is equivalent (in ZF) to three main results:
A well-known joke alluding to this equivalency (which may defy human intuition) is attributed to Jerry Bona:
"The Axiom of Choice is obviously true, the well-ordering principle obviously false, and who can tell about Zorn's lemma?"
Moreover, Zorn's lemma (or one of its equivalent forms) implies some major results in other mathematical areas. For example,
In this sense, we see how Zorn's lemma can be seen as a powerful tool, especially in the sense of unified mathematics.
In popular culture.
The 1970 film, Zorns Lemma, is named after the lemma.
This lemma was referenced on The Simpsons on the episode "Bart's New Friend".

</doc>
<doc id="51453" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51453" title="Singular function">
Singular function

In mathematics, a real-valued function "f" on the interval ["a", "b"] is said to be singular if it has the following properties:
A standard example of a singular function is the Cantor function, which is sometimes called the devil's staircase (a term also used for singular functions in general). There are, however, other functions that have been given that name. One is defined in terms of the circle map.
If "f"("x") = 0 for all "x" ≤ "a" and "f"("x") = 1 for all "x" ≥ "b", then the function can be taken to represent a cumulative distribution function for a random variable which is neither a discrete random variable (since the probability is zero for each point) nor an absolutely continuous random variable (since the probability density is zero everywhere it exists).
Singular functions occur, for instance, as sequences of spatially modulated phases or structures in solids and magnets, described in a prototypical fashion by the "model of Frenkel and Kontorova" and by the "ANNNI model", as well as in some dynamical systems. Most famously, perhaps, they lie at the center of the fractional quantum Hall effect.
When referring to functions with a singularity.
When discussing mathematical analysis in general, or more specifically real analysis or complex analysis or differential equations, it is common for a function which contains a mathematical singularity to be referred to as a 'singular function'. This is especially true when referring to functions which diverge to infinity at a point or on a boundary. For example one might say, ""1/x" becomes singular at the origin, so "1/x" is a singular function."
Advanced techniques for working with functions that contain singularities have been developed in the subject called distributional or generalized function analysis. A weak derivative is defined that allows singular functions to be used in partial differential equations, etc.
References.
(**) This condition depends on the references

</doc>
<doc id="51456" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51456" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan">
Mohammed Daoud Khan

Sardar Mohammed Daoud Khan or Daud Khan (July 18, 1909 – April 28, 1978) was the Prime Minister of Afghanistan from 1953 to 1963, and later became the first President of Afghanistan. He overthrew the Musahiban monarchy of his first cousin Mohammed Zahir Shah and declared himself as the first President of Afghanistan from 1973 until his assassination in 1978 as a result of the Saur Revolution led by the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). Daoud Khan was known for his progressive policies, his efforts for the improvement of women's rights and for initiating two five-year modernization plans which increased the labor force by about 50 percent.
Early life.
Prince Daoud (Pashto for "David") was born in Kabul, the eldest son of the diplomat HRH Prince Mohammed Aziz Khan (1877–1933) (an older half-brother of King Mohammed Nadir Shah) and his wife, Khurshid Begum. He lost his father to an assassination in Berlin in 1933, while his father was serving as the Afghan Ambassador to Germany. He and his brother Naim Khan (1911–1978) then came under the tutelage of their uncle HRH Prince Hashim Khan (1884–1953). Daoud proved to be an apt student of politics. Educated in France, he served as Governor of the Eastern Province in 1934-35 and in 1938–39, and was Governor of Kandahar Province from 1935 to 1938.
In 1939, Daoud Khan was promoted to Lieutenant-General and commander of the important Kabul Army Corps until 1946. From 1946 to 1948, he served as Defense Minister, then Interior Minister from 1949 to 1951. In 1948, he served as Afghan Ambassador to France. In 1951, he was promoted to General and served in that capacity as Commander of the Central Corps of the Afghan Armed Forces in Kabul from 1951 to 1953.
Royal Prime Minister.
Daoud was appointed Prime Minister in September 1953 in an intra-family transfer of power that involved no violence. His ten-year tenure was noted for his foreign policy turn to the Soviet Union, the completion of the Helmand Valley project, which radically improved living conditions in southwestern Afghanistan, and tentative steps towards the emancipation of women.
Daoud supported a nationalistic and reunification of the Pakistani Pashtun people with Afghanistan, but this would have involved taking a considerable amount of territory from the new nation of Pakistan and was in direct antagonism to an older plan of the 1950s whereby a confederation between the two countries was proposed. The move further worried the non-Pashtun populations of Afghanistan such as the minority Tajik and Uzbek who suspected Daoud Khan's intention was to increase the Pashtun's disproportionate hold on political power. With the creation of an independent Pakistan in 1947, the Durand Line conflict with the British colonialists was inherited by the two countries.
In 1961, as a result of Daoud's policies and support to militias in areas along the Durand Line, Pakistan closed its borders with Afghanistan causing an economic crisis and greater dependence on the USSR. The USSR became Afghanistan's principal trading partner. Within a few months, the USSR had sent jet airplanes, tanks, heavy and light artillery for a heavily discounted price tag of $25 million.
In 1960, Daoud sent troops across the poorly-marked Durand Line into the Bajaur Agency of Pakistan in an attempt to manipulate events in that area and to press the Pashtunistan issue, but the Afghan forces were routed by Pakistani Tribals. During this period, the propaganda war from Afghanistan, carried on by radio, was relentless.
The crisis was finally resolved with the forced resignation of Daoud Khan in March 1963 and the re-opening of the border in May. Pakistan has continued to remain suspicious of Afghan intentions and Daoud's policy has left a negative impression in the eyes of many Tajiks who felt they were being disenfranchised for the sake of Pashtun Nationalism.
In 1964, King Zahir Shah introduced a new constitution, for the first time excluding all members of the royal family from the council of ministers. Daoud had already stepped down. In addition to having been prime minister, Daoud had also held the portfolios of Minister of Defense and Minister of Planning until 1963.
President of the Republic.
On July 17, 1973, Daoud seized power from his cousin (and brother-in-law) King Zahir in a bloodless coup. Departing from tradition, and for the first time in Afghan history, Daoud did not proclaim himself Shah, establishing instead a republic with himself as President.
In 1974, Daoud signed one of two economic packages that would enable Afghanistan to have a far more capable military because of increasing fears of lacking an up-to-date modern army when compared to the militaries of Iran and Pakistan. Daoud hosted General Secretary of the National Awami Party led by Khan Abdul Wali Khan, Ajmal Khattak,and others like Juma Khan Sufi, Baluch guerriallas etc. and started training Pakhtun Zalmay and young Baluchs and was sending them to Pakistan for sabotage and militancy. So much so that one of Bhutto's senior members, minister of interior and head of provincial party, Hayat Mohammad Sherpao, was killed and the relations with Pakistan further dipped. As a response Pakistan also started the same. By 1975, Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, through its Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), has been engaged in promoting a proxy war in Afghanistan. Some of those trained and supported by Pakistan were Jalaluddin Haqqani, Ahmad Shah Massoud, and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
King Zahir Shah's democratic constitution with elected members and the separation of powers was replaced by a now largely nominated loya jirga (meaning "grand assembly"). A new constitution backed by a loya jirga was promulgated in February 1977, but failed to satisfy all political factions.
In 1976, under pressure from the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) and to increase domestic Pashtun support, he took a stronger line on the Pashtunistan issue and promoted a proxy war in Pakistan. Trade and transit agreements with Pakistan were subsequently severely affected. Soon after Daoud's army and police faced a growing Islamic fundamentalist movement, the Islamic fundamentalist movement's leaders fled to Pakistan. There, they were supported by Prime Minister Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto and encouraged to continue the fight against Daoud. Daoud was successful in suppressing the movement, however. Later in 1978, when Daoud was promoting his new foreign policy doctrine, he came to a tentative agreement on a solution to the Pashtunistan problem with Ali Bhutto.
In 1977, Daoud Khan presented a new constitution to the National Assembly, which wrote in several new articles and amended others. He also began to moderate his socialist policies. In 1978, there was a rift with the PDPA. Internally, Daoud attempted to distance himself from the communist elements within the coup. He was concerned about the tenor of many communists in his government and Afghanistan's growing dependency on the Soviet Union. These moves were highly criticized by Moscow, which feared that Afghanistan would soon become closer to the West, especially the United States; the Soviets had always feared that the United States could find a way to influence the government in Kabul.
A coup against Daoud, which may have been planned before he took power, was repressed shortly after his seizure of power. In October 1973, Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal, a former prime minister and a highly respected former diplomat, was arrested in a coup plot and died in prison. This was at a time when Parchamis controlled the Ministry of Interior under circumstances corroborating the widespread belief that he had been tortured to death. One of the army generals arrested under suspicion of this plot with Maiwandwal was Mohammed Asif Safi, who was later released. Daoud personally apologized to him for the arrest.
Daoud wanted to lessen the country's dependence on the Soviet Union and attempted to promote a new foreign policy. He went to Egypt, India, Saudi Arabia, and Iran for aid. Surprisingly, he did not renew the Pashtunistan agitation; relations with Pakistan improved thanks to interventions from the US and Iran.
The following year, he established his own political party, the National Revolutionary Party, which became the focus of all political activity. In January 1977, a loya jirga approved the constitution establishing a presidential one-party system of government.
Diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.
President Daoud met Leonid Brezhnev on a state visit to Moscow from April 12 to 15, 1977. Daoud had asked for a private meeting with the Soviet leader to discuss with him the increased pattern of Soviet actions in Afghanistan. In particular, he discussed the intensified Soviet attempt to unite the two factions of the Afghan communist parties, Parcham and Khalq. Brezhnev described Afghanistan's non-alignment as important to the USSR and essential to the promotion of peace in Asia, but warned him about the presence of experts from NATO countries stationed in the northern parts of Afghanistan. Daoud bluntly replied that Afghanistan would remain free, and that the Soviet Union would never be allowed to dictate how the country should be governed.
After returning to Afghanistan, Daoud made plans that his government would diminish its relationships with the Soviet Union, and instead forge closer contacts with the West as well as the oil-rich Saudi Arabia and Iran. Afghanistan signed a co-operative military treaty with Egypt and by 1977, the Afghan military and police force were being trained by Egyptian Armed forces. This angered the Soviet Union because Egypt took the same route in 1974 and distanced itself from the Soviets.
Communist coup and assassination.
The April 19, 1978 funeral of Mir Akbar Khyber, the prominent Parchami ideologue who had been murdered, served as a rallying point for the Afghan communists. An estimated 1,000 to 3,000 people gathered to hear speeches by PDPA leaders such as Nur Muhammad Taraki, Hafizullah Amin and Babrak Karmal.
Shocked by this demonstration of communist unity, Daoud ordered the arrest of the PDPA leaders, but he reacted too slowly. It took him a week to arrest Taraki, Karmal managed to escape to the USSR, and Amin was merely placed under house arrest. According to PDPA documents, Amin sent complete orders for the coup from his home while it was under armed guard using his family as messengers.
The army had been put on alert on April 26 because of a presumed "anti-Islamic" coup. On April 27, 1978, a coup d'état beginning with troop movements at the military base at Kabul International Airport, gained ground slowly over the next twenty-four hours as rebels battled units loyal to Daoud Khan in and around the capital. Some believe that Pakistani Prime Minister Bhutto paved the way for the Saur Revolution in Kabul by making Daoud spread the Afghan Armed Forces to the countryside. Bhutto himself was hanged to death in April 1979.
Death.
Daoud and most of his family were assassinated during a coup by members of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). The coup happened in the presidential palace on April 28, 1978. His death was not publicly announced after the coup. Instead, the new government declared that President Daoud had "resigned for health reasons." (In 1979, Taraki was killed by Amin, who, in turn, was killed by the KGB; Karmal died in 1996 of cancer in Moscow).
On June 28, 2008, the body of President Daoud and those of his family were found in two separate mass graves in the Pul-e-Charkhi area, District 12 of Kabul city. Initial reports indicate that sixteen corpses were in one grave and twelve others were in the second. On December 4, 2008, the Afghan Health Ministry announced that the body of Daoud had been identified on the basis of teeth molds and a small golden Quran found near the body. The Quran was a present he had received from the king of Saudi Arabia. On March 17, 2009 Daoud was given a state funeral.
Personal life.
In 1934, Daoud married HRH Princess Zamina Begum (1917 — 26 April 1978), sister of King Zahir Shah. The couple had four sons and four daughters:

</doc>
<doc id="51458" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51458" title="AutoLISP">
AutoLISP

AutoLISP is a dialect of the LISP programming language built specifically for use with the full version of AutoCAD and its derivatives, which include "AutoCAD Map 3D", "AutoCAD Architecture" and "AutoCAD Mechanical". Neither the application programming interface nor the interpreter to execute AutoLISP code are included in the AutoCAD LT product line. 
Features.
AutoLISP is a small, dynamically scoped, dynamically typed LISP dialect with garbage collection, immutable list structure and settable symbols, lacking in such regular LISP features as macro system, records definition facilities, arrays, functions with variable number of arguments or let bindings. Aside from the core language, most of the primitive functions are for geometry, accessing AutoCAD's internal DWG database, or manipulation of graphical entities in AutoCAD. The properties of these graphical entities are revealed to AutoLISP as association lists in which values are paired with AutoCAD "group codes" that indicate properties such as definitional points, radii, colors, layers, linetypes, etc. AutoCAD loads AutoLISP code from .LSP files.
AutoLISP code can interact with the user through AutoCAD's graphical editor by use of primitive functions that allow the user to pick points, choose objects on screen, input numbers and other data. AutoLisp also has a built-in GUI mini-language, the Dialog Control Language, for creating modal dialog boxes with automated layout, within AutoCAD. 
History.
AutoLISP was derived from an early version of XLISP, which was created by David Betz. The language was introduced in AutoCAD Version 2.18 in January 1986, and continued to be enhanced in successive releases up to Release 13 in February 1995. After that, its development was neglected by Autodesk in favor of more fashionable development environments like VBA, .NET and ObjectARX. However, it has remained AutoCAD's primary user customization language.
Vital-LISP, a considerably enhanced version of AutoLISP including an IDE, debugger and compiler, and ActiveX support, was developed and sold by third party developer Basis Software. Vital LISP was a superset of the existing AutoLISP language that added VBA-like access to the AutoCAD object model, reactors (event handling for AutoCAD objects), general ActiveX support, and some other general Lisp functions. Autodesk purchased this, renamed it Visual LISP, and briefly sold it as an add-on to AutoCAD Release 14 released in May 1997. It was incorporated into AutoCAD 2000 released in March 1999, as a replacement for AutoLISP. Since then Autodesk has chosen to halt major enhancements to Visual LISP in favor of focusing more effort on VBA and .NET and C++. As of January 31, 2014, Autodesk no longer supports versions of VBA older than 7.1. This is part of a long-term process of switching over from VBA to .NET for customization. 
AutoLISP has such a strong following that other CAD application vendors add it to their own products. Bricscad, IntelliCAD and others have AutoLISP functionality, so that AutoLISP users can consider using them as an alternative to AutoCAD. Most development involving AutoLISP since AutoCAD 2000 is actually performed within Visual LISP since the original AutoLISP engine was replaced with the Visual LISP engine. There are thousands of utilities and applications that have been developed using AutoLISP or Visual LISP (distributed as LSP, FAS and VLX files). 
Examples.
A simple Hello world program in AutoLisp would be:
<syntaxhighlight lang="cadlisp" line>
)
</syntaxhighlight>
Note the final line inside the function definition: The codice_1 function, when not passed an argument, does not return a value. As the AutoCAD command line functions as a REPL, this would normally print "Hello World!" to the command line, followed immediately by the return value of the call to codice_1. Without the final call to the codice_1 function, the result of this would be:
A more complex example might be:
<syntaxhighlight lang="cadlisp" line>
</syntaxhighlight>
The above code defines a new function which generates an AutoCAD point object at a given point, with a single-line text object displaying the X and Y coordinates beside it. The name of the function includes a special prefix 'c:', which causes AutoCAD to recognize the function as a regular command. The user, upon typing 'pointlabel' at the AutoCAD Command Prompt, would be prompted to pick a point, either by typing the X and Y coordinates, or clicking a location in the drawing. The function would then place a marker at that point, and create a single-line text object next to it, containing the x and y coordinates of the point expressed relative to the active User Coordinate System (UCS). The function requires no parameters, and contains one Local variable ('pnt').
The above example could also be written using built-in AutoCAD commands to achieve the same result, however this approach is susceptible to changes to the command prompts between AutoCAD releases.

</doc>
<doc id="51459" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51459" title="South Platte River">
South Platte River

The South Platte River is one of the two principal tributaries of the Platte River and is itself a major river of the American Midwest and the American Southwest/Mountain West, located in the U.S. states of Colorado and Nebraska. Its drainage basin includes much of the eastern flank of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado; much of the populated region known as the Colorado Front Range and Eastern Plains; and a portion of southeastern Wyoming in the vicinity of the city of Cheyenne. It joins the North Platte River in western Nebraska to form the Platte, which then flows across Nebraska to the Missouri. The river serves as the principal source of water for eastern Colorado. In its valley along the foothills in Colorado, it has permitted agriculture in an area of the Colorado Piedmont and Great Plains that is otherwise arid.
Description.
The river is formed in Park County, Colorado, southwest of Denver in the South Park grassland basin by the confluence of the South Fork and Middle Fork, approximately southeast of Fairplay. Both forks rise along the eastern flank of the Mosquito Range, on the western side of South Park, which is drained by the tributaries at the headwaters of the river. From South Park, it passes through of the Platte Canyon and its lower section, Waterton Canyon. Here, it is joined by the North Fork before emerging from the foothills southwest of the Denver suburb of Littleton. At Littleton, the river is impounded to form Chatfield Reservoir, a major source of drinking water for the Denver Metropolitan Area.
The river flows north through central Denver, which was founded along its banks at its confluence with Cherry Creek. The valley through Denver is highly industrialized, serving generally as the route for both the railroad lines, as well as Interstate 25. On the north side of Denver it is joined somewhat inconspicuously by Clear Creek, which descends from the mountains to the west in a canyon that was the cradle of the Pike's Peak Gold Rush. North of Denver it flows through the agricultural heartland of the Piedmont (a shale region that was formed through erosion by the ancestor of the river following the creation of the Rockies). It flows directly past the communities of Brighton and Fort Lupton, and is joined in succession by Saint Vrain Creek, the Little Thompson River, the Big Thompson River, and the Cache la Poudre River, which it receives just east of Greeley.
East of Greeley it turns eastward, flowing across the Colorado Eastern Plains, past Fort Morgan and Brush, where it turns northeastward. It continues past Sterling, and runs into Nebraska between Julesburg, Colorado and Big Springs, Nebraska. In Nebraska, it passes south of Ogallala and joins the North Platte River near the city of North Platte.
The South Platte River through Denver is on the U.S. EPA's list of impaired waterbodies for pathogen impairment, with E. coli as the representative pathogen species. Other water issues involve the appearance of the New Zealand Mud Snail and of the Zebra Mussel.
History.
The South Platte was originally called the Rio Chato (see the report of the Humano and Bonillo Expedition). In 1702, it was named the Rio Jesus Maria by Captain Jose Lopez, the Tewa Irish scout and Captain of War of the New Mexico Indian Auxiliaries who was ordered by the Viceroy of New Spain to search the Tierra Incognita for a French incursion into New Mexico. The South Platte River also served as a vital water source in Colorado. Long before the city of Denver was created many travelers came to the South Platte River to escape the arid Great Plains. These people could survive the heat but not without the vital water source that the South Platte River gave them. Buckets and wells sufficed as a water system for a while but eventually the Denver Water System was created.
Dams.
In an arid region of the United States, the South Platte is marked with several dams. The first notable water impoundment on the South Platte is Antero Reservoir. "Antero" is derived from the Spanish word "first," as it was the first dam on the South Platte River near the river's origin.
The next dam is Spinney Mountain Reservoir. At capacity Spinney Mountain covers . A bottom release dam, Spinney releases to the east of the inlet.
Two miles below Spinney Mountain Reservoir, the river enters Eleven Mile Reservoir, with a capacity of . The Eleven Mile Reservoir Dam drains into Eleven Mile Canyon, which runs through Forest Service land. Under the reservoir are three former Colorado towns, Howbert, Idlewild, and Freshwater Station, which were submerged to meet the water needs of Denver.
From Eleven Mile Canyon, the South Platte runs northeast to Cheesman Reservoir, named for Denver water pioneer Walter S. Cheesman. At its completion in 1905, the dam was the world’s tallest, at above the streambed. The reservoir and related facilities were purchased in November 1918 by the Denver Water Board. Cheesman was the first reservoir of Denver's mountain storage facilities and has been designated a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark. Cheesman Reservoir feeds Cheesman Canyon. Six miles below Cheesman Reservoir is the town of Deckers; there, the river bends north for approximately to the confluence with the North Fork of the South Platte.
In the late 1980s, a proposal was put forth for the Two Forks Dam, which would have created a reservoir flooding the entire section from the North Fork confluence to the town of Deckers. In 1990 the Environmental Protection Agency vetoed the permit, calling the project an "environmental catastrophe."
From the confluence, the river flows towards Denver and enters Strontia Springs Reservoir.
Below Strontia Springs the South Platte runs through Waterton Canyon before entering Chatfield Reservoir. Chatfield marks the seventh and final dam on the South Platte until it merges with the North Platte.
Fly fishing overview.
The South Platte River is a Gold Medal Western trout river on the Eastern Slope of Colorado. The river is well known for its wild trophy population of Brown Trout and Rainbow Trout. As a result of the close proximity to Denver, the river sees thousands of fly fishing enthusiasts each year. With seven dams on the river, the South Platte is considered a tailwater fishery. Most of these dams are bottom released which allow for both stable water temperatures throughout the year, and year round fly fishing. Popular fly fishing stretches of the river include Waterton Canyon, Deckers, Cheesman Canyon and the Dream Stream.

</doc>
<doc id="51462" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51462" title="Machine">
Machine

A machine is a tool containing one or more parts that uses energy to perform an intended action. Machines are usually powered by mechanical, chemical, thermal, or electrical means, and are often motorized. Historically, a power tool also required moving parts to classify as a machine. However, the advent of electronics has led to the development of power tools without moving parts that are considered machines.
A simple machine is a device that simply transforms the direction or magnitude of a force, but a large number of more complex machines exist. Examples include vehicles, electronic systems, molecular machines, computers, television, and radio.
Etymology.
The word "machine" derives from the Latin word "machina", which in turn derives from the Greek (Doric , Ionic "contrivance, machine, engine", a derivation from "means, expedient, remedy"). The word "mechanical" comes from the same Greek roots.
A wider meaning of "fabric, structure" is found in classical Latin, but not in Greek usage.
This meaning is found in late medieval French, and is adopted from the French into English in the mid-16th century.
In the 17th century, the word could also mean a scheme or plot, a meaning now expressed by the derived machination.
The modern meaning develops out of specialized application of the term to stage engines used in theater and to military siege engines, both in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
The OED traces the formal, modern meaning to John Harris' "Lexicon Technicum" (1704), which has:
The word "engine" used as a (near-)synonym both by Harris and in later language derives ultimately (via Old French) from Latin "ingenium" "ingenuity, an invention".
History.
Perhaps the first example of a human made device designed to manage power is the hand axe, made by chipping flint to form a wedge. A wedge is a simple machine that transforms lateral force and movement of the tool into a transverse splitting force and movement of the workpiece.
The idea of a "simple machine" originated with the Greek philosopher Archimedes around the 3rd century BC, who studied the Archimedean simple machines: lever, pulley, and screw. He discovered the principle of mechanical advantage in the lever. Later Greek philosophers defined the classic five simple machines (excluding the inclined plane) and were able to roughly calculate their mechanical advantage. Heron of Alexandria (ca. 10–75 AD) in his work "Mechanics" lists five mechanisms that can "set a load in motion"; lever, windlass, pulley, wedge, and screw, and describes their fabrication and uses. However the Greeks' understanding was limited to statics (the balance of forces) and did not include dynamics (the tradeoff between force and distance) or the concept of work.
During the Renaissance the dynamics of the "Mechanical Powers", as the simple machines were called, began to be studied from the standpoint of how much useful work they could perform, leading eventually to the new concept of mechanical work. In 1586 Flemish engineer Simon Stevin derived the mechanical advantage of the inclined plane, and it was included with the other simple machines. The complete dynamic theory of simple machines was worked out by Italian scientist Galileo Galilei in 1600 in "Le Meccaniche" ("On Mechanics"). He was the first to understand that simple machines do not create energy, they merely transform it.
The classic rules of sliding friction in machines were discovered by Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), but remained unpublished in his notebooks. They were rediscovered by Guillaume Amontons (1699) and were further developed by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1785).
Types.
Mechanical.
The word mechanical refers to the work that has been produced by machines or the machinery. It mostly relates to the machinery tools and the mechanical applications of science. Some of its synonyms are automatic and mechanic.
Simple machines.
The idea that a machine can be broken down into simple movable elements led Archimedes to define the lever, pulley and screw as simple machines. By the time of the Renaissance this list increased to include the wheel and axle, wedge and inclined plane.
Engines.
An engine or motor is a machine designed to convert energy into useful mechanical motion. Heat engines, including internal combustion engines and external combustion engines (such as steam engines) burn a fuel to create heat, which is then used to create motion. Electric motors convert electrical energy into mechanical motion, pneumatic motors use compressed air and others, such as wind-up toys use elastic energy. In biological systems, molecular motors like myosins in muscles use chemical energy to create motion.
Electrical.
Electrical means operating by or producing electricity, relating to or concerned with electricity. In other words, it means using, providing, producing, transmitting or operated by electricity.
Electrical machine.
An electrical machine is the generic name for a device that converts mechanical energy to electrical energy, converts electrical energy to mechanical energy, or changes alternating current from one voltage level to a different voltage level.
Electronic machine.
Electronics is the branch of physics, engineering and technology dealing with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies. The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes amplification of weak signals possible and is usually applied to information and signal processing. Similarly, the ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information processing possible. Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronic packaging technology, and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a working system.
Computing machines.
Computers are machines to process information, often in the form of numbers. Charles Babbage designed various machines to tabulate logarithms and other functions in 1837. His Difference engine can be considered an advanced mechanical calculator and his Analytical Engine a forerunner of the modern computer, though none were built in Babbage's lifetime.
Modern computers are electronic ones. They use electric charge, current or magnetization to store and manipulate information. Computer architecture deals with detailed design of computers. There are also simplified models of computers, like State machine and Turing machine.
Molecular machines.
Study of the molecules and proteins that are the basis of biological functions has led to the concept of a molecular machine. For example, current models of the operation of the kinesin molecule that transports vesicles inside the cell as well as the myosin molecule that operates against actin to cause muscle contraction; these molecules control movement in response to chemical stimuli.
Researchers in nano-technology are working to construct molecules that perform movement in response to a specific stimulus. In contrast to molecules such as kinesin and myosin, these nanomachines or molecular machines are constructions like traditional machines that are designed to perform in a task.
Machine elements.
Machines are assembled from standardized types of components. These elements consist of mechanisms that control movement in various ways such as gear trains, transistor switches, belt or chain drives, linkages, cam and follower systems, brakes and clutches, and "structural components" such as frame members and fasteners.
Modern machines include sensors, actuators and computer controllers. The shape, texture and color of covers provide a styling and operational interface between the mechanical components of a machine and its users.
Mechanisms.
Assemblies within a machine that control movement are often called "mechanisms." Mechanisms are generally classified as gears and gear trains, cam and follower mechanisms, and linkages, though there are other special mechanisms such as clamping linkages, indexing mechanisms and friction devices such as brakes and clutches.
For more details on mechanical machines see Machine (mechanical) and Mechanical systems.
Controllers.
Controllers combine sensors, logic, and actuators to maintain the performance of components of a machine. Perhaps the best known is the flyball governor for a steam engine. Examples of these devices range from a thermostat that as temperature rises opens a valve to cooling water to speed controllers such the cruise control system in an automobile. The programmable logic controller replaced relays and specialized control mechanisms with a programmable computer. Servo motors that accurately position a shaft in response to an electrical command are the actuators that make robotic systems possible.
Impact.
Industrial Revolution.
The Industrial Revolution was a period from 1750 to 1850 where changes in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, transportation, and technology had a profound effect on the social, economic and cultural conditions of the times. It began in the United Kingdom, then subsequently spread throughout Western Europe, North America, Japan, and eventually the rest of the world.
Starting in the later part of the 18th century, there began a transition in parts of Great Britain's previously manual labour and draft-animal–based economy towards machine-based manufacturing. It started with the mechanisation of the textile industries, the development of iron-making techniques and the increased use of refined coal.
Mechanization and automation.
Mechanization or mechanisation (BE) is providing human operators with machinery that assists them with the muscular requirements of work or displaces muscular work. In some fields, mechanization includes the use of hand tools. In modern usage, such as in engineering or economics, mechanization implies machinery more complex than hand tools and would not include simple devices such as an un-geared horse or donkey mill. Devices that cause speed changes or changes to or from reciprocating to rotary motion, using means such as gears, pulleys or sheaves and belts, shafts, cams and cranks, usually are considered machines. After electrification, when most small machinery was no longer hand powered, mechanization was synonymous with motorized machines.
Automation is the use of control systems and information technologies to reduce the need for human work in the production of goods and services. In the scope of industrialization, automation is a step beyond mechanization. Whereas mechanization provides human operators with machinery to assist them with the muscular requirements of work, automation greatly decreases the need for human sensory and mental requirements as well. Automation plays an increasingly important role in the world economy and in daily experience.
Automata.
An automaton (plural: automata or automatons) is a self-operating machine. The word is sometimes used to describe a robot, more specifically an autonomous robot. An alternative spelling, now obsolete, is automation.

</doc>
<doc id="51464" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51464" title="Great Plains">
Great Plains

The Great Plains is the broad expanse of flat land (a plain), much of it covered in prairie, steppe and grassland, that lies west of the Mississippi River tallgrass prairie states and east of the Rocky Mountains in the United States and Canada. This area covers parts, but not all, of the states of Colorado, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming, and the Canadian provinces of Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan. The region is known for supporting extensive cattle ranching and dry farming.
The Canadian portion of the Plains is known as the Prairies. Some geographers include some territory of northern Mexico in the Plains, but many stop at the Rio Grande.
Usage.
The term "Great Plains" is used in the United States to describe a sub-section of the even more vast Interior Plains physiographic division, which covers much of the interior of North America. It also has currency as a region of human geography, referring to the Plains Indians or the Plains States.
In Canada the term is little used; Natural Resources Canada, the government department responsible for official mapping and equivalent to the United States Geological Survey, treats the Interior Plains as one unit consisting of several related plateaux and plains. There is no region referred to as the "Great Plains" in "The Atlas of Canada". In terms of human geography, the term "prairie" is more commonly used in Canada, and the region is known as the Prairie Provinces or simply "the Prairies."
The North American Environmental Atlas, produced by the Commission for Environmental Cooperation, a NAFTA agency composed of the geographical agencies of the Mexican, American, and Canadian governments uses the "Great Plains" as an ecoregion synonymous with predominant prairies and grasslands rather than as physiographic region defined by topography. The Great Plains ecoregion includes five sub-regions: Temperate Prairies, West-Central Semi-Arid Prairies, South-Central Semi-Arid Prairies, Texas Louisiana Coastal Plains, and Tamaulipus-Texas Semi-Arid Plain, which overlap or expand upon other Great Plains designations.
Extent.
The region is about east to west and north to south. Much of the region was home to American bison herds until they were hunted to near extinction during the mid/late 19th century. It has an area of approximately . Current thinking regarding the geographic boundaries of the Great Plains is shown by this map at the Center for Great Plains Studies, University of Nebraska–Lincoln.
The term "Great Plains", for the region west of about the 96th or 98th meridian and east of the Rocky Mountains, was not generally used before the early 20th century. Nevin Fenneman's 1916 study, "Physiographic Subdivision of the United States", brought the term Great Plains into more widespread usage. Before that the region was almost invariably called the High Plains, in contrast to the lower Prairie Plains of the Midwestern states. Today the term "High Plains" is used for a subregion of the Great Plains.
Geography.
The Great Plains are the westernmost portion of the vast North American Interior Plains, which extend east to the Appalachian Plateau. The United States Geological Survey divides the Great Plains in the United States into ten physiographic subdivisions:
Paleontology.
During the Cretaceous Period (145-66 million years ago), the Great Plains were covered by a shallow inland sea called the Western Interior Seaway. However, during the Late Cretaceous to the Paleocene (65-55 million years ago), the seaway had begun to recede, leaving behind thick marine deposits and a relatively flat terrain which the seaway had once occupied.
During the Cenozoic era, specifically about 25 million years ago during the Miocene and Pliocene epochs, the continental climate became favorable to the evolution of grasslands. Existing forest biomes declined and grasslands became much more widespread. 
The grasslands provided a new niche for mammals, including many ungulates and glires, that switched from browsing diets to grazing diets. Traditionally, the spread of grasslands and the development of grazers have been strongly linked. However, an examination of mammalian teeth suggests that it is the open, gritty habitat and not the grass itself which is linked to diet changes in mammals, giving rise to the "grit, not grass" hypothesis.
Paleontological finds in the area have yielded bones of mammoths, saber-toothed cats and other ancient animals, as well as dozens of other megafauna (large animals over ) – such as giant sloths, horses, mastodons, and American lion – that dominated the area of the ancient Great Plains for 100,000 of years. The vast majority of these animals became extinct in North America at the end of the Pleistocene (around 13,000 years ago).
Climate.
In general, the Great Plains have a wide variety of weather through the year, with very cold and harsh winters and very hot and humid summers. Wind speeds are often very high, especially in winter. Grasslands are among the least protected biomes. Humans have converted much of the prairies for agricultural purposes or to create pastures. The Great Plains have dust storms mostly every year or so.
The 100th meridian roughly corresponds with the line that divides the Great Plains into an area that receive or more of rainfall per year and an area that receives less than . In this context, the High Plains, as well as Southern Alberta, south-western Saskatchewan and Eastern Montana are mainly semi hot steppe land and are generally characterised by rangeland or marginal farmland. The region (especially the High Plains) is periodically subjected to extended periods of drought; high winds in the region may then generate devastating dust storms. The eastern Great Plains near the eastern boundary falls in the humid subtropical climate zone in the southern areas, and the northern and central areas fall in the humid continental climate.
Many thunderstorms occur in the plains in the spring through summer. The southeastern portion of the Great Plains is the most tornado active area in the world and is sometimes referred to as Tornado Alley.
Since the Great Plains Region is very spread out, the climate can vary a lot. In general, the Great Plains has cold, harsh winters and hot, humid summers. Thunderstorms often occur here because the Great Plains contains mostly flat regions; thunderstorms "soak" moisture better this way. Sometimes, there is a dust storm; an example of one is the Dust Bowl.
Flora.
The Great Plains are part of the floristic North American Prairies Province, which extends from the Rocky Mountains to the Appalachians.
History.
Original American contact.
The first Americans (Paleo-Indians) who arrived to the Great Plains were successive indigenous cultures who are known to have inhabited the Great Plains for thousands of years, over 15,000 years ago. Humans entered the North American continent in waves of migration, mostly over Beringia, the Bering Straits land bridge.
Historically the Great Plains were the range of the bison and of the culture of the Plains Indians, whose tribes included the Blackfoot, Crow, Sioux, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche, and others. Eastern portions of the Great Plains were inhabited by tribes who lived in semi-permanent villages of earth lodges, such as the Arikara, Mandan, Pawnee and Wichita.
European contact.
With the arrival of Francisco Vázquez de Coronado, a Spanish conquistador, the first recorded history of encounter between Europeans and Native Americans in the Great Plains occurred in Texas, Kansas and Nebraska from 1540-1542. In that same time period, Hernando de Soto crossed a west-northwest direction in what is now Oklahoma and Texas. Today this is known as the De Soto Trail. The Spanish thought the Great Plains were the location of the mythological "Quivira and Cíbola", a place said to be rich in gold.
Over the next one hundred years, founding of the fur trade brought thousands of ethnic Europeans into the Great Plains. Fur trappers from France, Spain, Britain, Russia and the young United States made their way across much of the region, making regular contacts with Native Americans. After the United States acquired the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 and conducted the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1804-1806, more information about the Plains became available and various pioneers entered the areas.
Manuel Lisa, based in St. Louis, established a major fur trading site at his Fort Lisa on the Missouri River in Nebraska. Fur trading posts were often the basis of later settlements. Through the 19th century, more European Americans and Europeans migrated to the Great Plains as part of a vast westward expansion of population. New settlements became dotted across the Great Plains.
The new immigrants also brought diseases against which the Native Americans had no resistance. Between a half and two-thirds of the Plains Indians are thought to have died of smallpox by the time of the 1803 Louisiana Purchase.
Pioneer settlement.
After 1870, the new railroads across the Plains brought hunters who killed off almost all the bison for their hides. The railroads offered attractive packages of land and transportation to European farmers, who rushed to settle the land. They (and Americans as well) also took advantage of the homestead laws to obtain free farms. Land speculators and local boosters identified many potential towns, and those reached by the railroad had a chance, while the others became ghost towns. In Kansas, for example, nearly 5000 towns were mapped out, but by 1970 only 617 were actually operating. In the mid-20th century, closeness to an interstate exchange determined whether a town would flourish or struggle for business.
Much of the Great Plains became open range, or rangeland where cattle roamed free, hosting ranching operations where anyone was theoretically free to run cattle. In the spring and fall, ranchers held roundups where their cowboys branded new calves, treated animals and sorted the cattle for sale. Such ranching began in Texas and gradually moved northward. In 1866-95, cowboys herded 10 million cattle north to rail heads such as Dodge City, Kansas and Ogallala, Nebraska; from there, cattle were shipped eastward. 
Many foreign investors, especially British, financed the great ranches of the era. Overstocking of the range and the terrible winter of 1886 resulted in a disaster, with many cattle starved and frozen to death. Theodore Roosevelt, a rancher in the Dakotas, lost his entire investment; he returned east to reenter politics. From then on, ranchers generally raised feed to ensure they could keep their cattle alive over winter.
To allow for agricultural development of the Great Plains and house a growing population, the US passed the Homestead Acts of 1862: it allowed a settler to claim up to of land, provided that he lived on it for a period of five years and cultivated it. The provisions were expanded under the Kinkaid Act of 1904 to include a homestead of an entire section. Hundreds of thousands of people claimed such homesteads, sometimes building sod houses out of the very turf of their land. Many of them were not skilled dryland farmers and failures were frequent. Much of the Plains were settled during relatively wet years. Government experts did not understand how farmers should cultivate the prairies and gave advice counter to what would have worked. Germans from Russia who had previously farmed, under similar circumstances, in what is now Ukraine were marginally more successful than other homesteaders. The Dominion Lands Act of 1871 served a similar function for establishing homesteads on the prairies in Canada.
Social life.
The railroads opened up the Great Plains for settlement, for now it was possible to ship wheat and other crops at low cost to the urban markets in the East, and Europe. Homestead land was free for American settlers. Railroads sold their land at cheap rates to immigrants in expectation they would generate traffic as soon as farms were established. Immigrants poured in, especially from Germany and Scandinavia. On the plains, very few single men attempted to operate a farm or ranch by themselves; they clearly understood the need for a hard-working wife, and numerous children, to handle the many chores, including child-rearing, feeding and clothing the family, managing the housework, feeding the hired hands, and, especially after the 1930s, handling paperwork and financial details. During the early years of settlement, farm women played an integral role in assuring family survival by working outdoors. After approximately one generation, women increasingly left the fields, thus redefining their roles within the family. New technology including sewing and washing machines encouraged women to turn to domestic roles. The scientific housekeeping movement, promoted across the land by the media and government extension agents, as well as county fairs which featured achievements in home cookery and canning, advice columns for women regarding farm bookkeeping, and home economics courses in the schools.
Although the eastern image of farm life in the prairies emphasized the isolation of the lonely farmer and wife, plains residents created busy social lives for themselves. They often sponsored activities that combined work, food and entertainment such as barn raisings, corn huskings, quilting bees, Grange meetings, church activities and school functions. Women organized shared meals and potluck events, as well as extended visits between families. The Grange was a nationwide farmers' organization, they reserved high offices for women, and gave them a voice in public affairs.
After 19th century.
The region roughly centered on the Oklahoma Panhandle, including southeastern Colorado, southwestern Kansas, the Texas Panhandle, and extreme northeastern New Mexico was known as the Dust Bowl during the late 1920s and early 1930s. The effect of an extended drought, inappropriate cultivation, and financial crises of the Great Depression, forced many farmers off the land throughout the Great Plains.
From the 1950s on, many areas of the Great Plains have become productive crop-growing areas because of extensive irrigation on large landholdings. The United States is a major exporter of agricultural products. The southern portion of the Great Plains lies over the Ogallala Aquifer, a huge underground layer of water-bearing strata dating from the last ice age. Center pivot irrigation is used extensively in drier sections of the Great Plains, resulting in aquifer depletion at a rate that is greater than the ground's ability to recharge.
Population decline.
The rural Plains have lost a third of their population since 1920. Several hundred thousand square miles (several hundred thousand square kilometers) of the Great Plains have fewer than —the density standard Frederick Jackson Turner used to declare the American frontier "closed" in 1893. Many have fewer than . There are more than 6,000 ghost towns in the state of Kansas alone, according to Kansas historian Daniel Fitzgerald. This problem is often exacerbated by the consolidation of farms and the difficulty of attracting modern industry to the region. In addition, the smaller school-age population has forced the consolidation of school districts and the closure of high schools in some communities. The continuing population loss has led some to suggest that the current use of the drier parts of the Great Plains is not sustainable, and there has been a proposal - the "Buffalo Commons" - to return approximately 139,000 square miles (360,000 km2) of these drier parts to native prairie land.
Wind power.
The Great Plains contribute substantially to wind power in the United States. In July 2008, oilman turned wind-farm developer T. Boone Pickens called for the U.S. to invest $1 trillion to build an additional 200,000 MW of wind power nameplate capacity in the Plains, as part of his Pickens Plan. Pickens cited Sweetwater, Texas as an example of economic revitalization driven by wind power development.
Sweetwater was a struggling town typical of the Plains, steadily losing businesses and population, until wind turbines came to the surrounding Nolan County. Wind power brought jobs to local residents, along with royalty payments to landowners who leased sites for turbines, reversing the town's population decline. Pickens claims the same economic benefits are possible throughout the Plains, which he refers to as North America's "wind corridor."
See also.
International steppe-lands:

</doc>
<doc id="51465" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51465" title="Molière">
Molière

Jean-Baptiste Poquelin, known by his stage name Molière (; ; 15 January 1622 – 17 February 1673), was a French playwright and actor who is considered to be one of the greatest masters of comedy in Western literature. Among Molière's best known works are "The Misanthrope", "The School for Wives", "Tartuffe", "The Miser", "The Imaginary Invalid", and "The Bourgeois Gentleman".
Born into a prosperous family and having studied at the Collège de Clermont (now Lycée Louis-le-Grand), Molière was well suited to begin a life in the theatre. Thirteen years as an itinerant actor helped him polish his comic abilities while he began writing, combining Commedia dell'arte elements with the more refined French comedy.
Through the patronage of aristocrats including Philippe I, Duke of Orléans—the brother of Louis XIV—Molière procured a command performance before the King at the Louvre. Performing a classic play by Pierre Corneille and a farce of his own, "The Doctor in Love", Molière was granted the use of salle du Petit-Bourbon near the Louvre, a spacious room appointed for theatrical performances. Later, Molière was granted the use of the theatre in the Palais-Royal. In both locations he found success among Parisians with plays such as "The Affected Ladies", "The School for Husbands" and "The School for Wives". This royal favour brought a royal pension to his troupe and the title "Troupe du Roi" ("The King's Troupe"). Molière continued as the official author of court entertainments.
Though he received the adulation of the court and Parisians, Molière's satires attracted criticism from moralists and the Catholic Church. "Tartuffe" and its attack on perceived religious hypocrisy roundly received condemnations from the Church, while "Don Juan" was banned from performance. Molière's hard work in so many theatrical capacities took its toll on his health and, by 1667, he was forced to take a break from the stage. In 1673, during a production of his final play, "The Imaginary Invalid", Molière, who suffered from pulmonary tuberculosis, was seized by a coughing fit and a haemorrhage while playing the hypochondriac Argan. He finished the performance but collapsed again and died a few hours later.
Life.
Molière was born in Paris, the son of Jean Poquelin and Marie Cressé, the daughter of a prosperous bourgeois family. He lost his mother when he was ten and he did not seem to have been particularly close to his father. After his mother's death, he lived with his father above the "Pavillon des Singes" on the rue Saint-Honoré, an affluent area of Paris. It is likely that his education commenced with studies in a Parisian elementary school; this was followed with his enrollment in the prestigious Jesuit Collège de Clermont, where he completed his studies in a strict academic environment and got a first taste of life on the stage.
In 1631, Jean Poquelin purchased from the court of Louis XIII the posts of "" ("valet of the King's chamber and keeper of carpets and upholstery"). His son assumed the same posts in 1641. The title required only three months' work and an initial cost of 1,200 livres; the title paid 300 livres a year and provided a number of lucrative contracts. Poquelin also studied as a provincial lawyer some time around 1642, probably in Orléans, but it is not documented that he ever qualified. So far he had followed his father's plans, which had served him well; he had mingled with nobility at the Collège de Clermont and seemed destined for a career in office.
In June 1643, when Molière was 21, he decided to abandon his social class and pursue a career on the stage. Taking leave of his father, he joined the actress Madeleine Béjart, with whom he had crossed paths before, and founded the Illustre Théâtre with 630 livres. They were later joined by Madeleine's brother and sister.
The new theatre troupe went bankrupt in 1645. Molière had become head of the troupe, due in part, perhaps, to his acting prowess and his legal training. However, the troupe had acquired large debts, mostly for the rent of the theatre (a court for jeu de paume), for which they owed 2000 livres. Historians differ as to whether his father or the lover of a member of his troupe paid his debts; either way, after a 24-hour stint in prison he returned to the acting circuit. It was at this time that he began to use the pseudonym "Molière", possibly inspired by a small village of the same name in the Midi near Le Vigan. It was also likely that he changed his name to spare his father the shame of having an actor in the family (actors, although no longer vilified by the state under Louis XIV, were still not allowed to be buried in sacred ground).
After his imprisonment, he and Madeleine began a theatrical circuit of the provinces with a new theatre troupe; this life was to last about twelve years, during which he initially played in the company of Charles Dufresne, and subsequently created a company of his own, which had sufficient success and obtained the patronage of Philippe I, Duke of Orléans. Few plays survive from this period. The most noteworthy are "L'Étourdi, ou le Contretemps" "(The Bungler)" and "Le Docteur Amoureux" "(The Doctor in Love)"; with these two plays, Molière moved away from the heavy influence of the Italian improvisational Commedia dell'arte, and displayed his talent for mockery. In the course of his travels he met Armand, Prince of Conti, the governor of Languedoc, who became his patron, and named his company after him. This friendship later ended when Conti, having contracted syphilis from a courtesan, turned towards religion and joined Molière's enemies in the "Parti des Dévots" and the "Compagnie de Saint Sacrement".
In Lyon, Mademoiselle Du Parc, known as "Marquise", joined the company. Marquise was courted, in vain, by Pierre Corneille and later became the lover of Jean Racine. Racine offered Molière his tragedy "Théagène et Chariclée" (one of the first works he wrote after he had abandoned his theology studies), but Molière would not perform it, though he encouraged Racine to pursue his artistic career. It is said that soon thereafter Molière became angry with Racine when he was told that he had secretly presented his tragedy to the company of the Hôtel de Bourgogne as well.
Return to Paris.
Molière was forced to reach Paris in stages, staying outside for a few weeks in order to promote himself with society gentlemen and allow his reputation to feed in to Paris. Molière reached Paris in 1658 and performed in front of the King at the Louvre (then for rent as a theatre) in Corneille's tragedy "Nicomède" and in the farce "Le Docteur Amoureux" with some success. He was awarded the title of "Troupe de Monsieur" (Monsieur being the honorific for the king's brother Philippe I, Duke of Orléans). With the help of Monsieur, his company was allowed to share the theatre in the large hall of the Petit-Bourbon with the famous Italian Commedia dell'arte company of Tiberio Fiorillo, famous for his character of Scaramouche. (The two companies performed in the theatre on different nights.) The premiere of Molière's "Les Précieuses Ridicules" ("The Affected Young Ladies") took place at the Petit-Bourbon on 18 November 1659.
"Les Précieuses Ridicules" was the first of Molière's many attempts to satirize certain societal mannerisms and affectations then common in France. It is widely accepted that the plot was based on Samuel Chappuzeau's "Le Cercle des Femmes" of 1656. He primarily mocks the Académie Française, a group created by Richelieu under a royal patent to establish the rules of the fledgling French theater. The Académie preached unity of time, action, and styles of verse. Molière is often associated with the claim that comedy "castigat ridendo mores" or "criticises customs through humour" (a phrase in fact coined by his contemporary Jean de Santeuil and sometimes mistaken for a classical Latin proverb).
Height of fame.
Despite his own preference for tragedy, which he had tried to further with the Illustre Théâtre, Molière became famous for his farces, which were generally in one act and performed after the tragedy. Some of these farces were only partly written, and were played in the style of Commedia dell'arte with improvisation over a canovaccio (a vague plot outline). He also wrote two comedies in verse, but these were less successful and are generally considered less significant. Later in life Molière concentrated on writing musical comedies, in which the drama is interrupted by songs and/or dances.
"Les Précieuses Ridicules" won Molière the attention and the criticism of many, but it was not a popular success. He then asked Fiorillo to teach him the techniques of Commedia dell'arte. His 1660 play "Sganarelle, ou Le Cocu imaginaire" ("The Imaginary Cuckold") seems to be a tribute both to Commedia dell'arte and to his teacher. Its theme of marital relationships dramatizes Molière's pessimistic views on the falsity inherent in human relationships. This view is also evident in his later works, and was a source of inspiration for many later authors, including (in a different field and with different effect) Luigi Pirandello. It describes a kind of round dance where two couples believe that each of their partners has been betrayed by the other's and is the first in Molière's 'Jealousy series' which includes "Dom Garcie de Navarre", "L'École des maris" and "L'École des femmes".
In 1660 the Petit-Bourbon was demolished to make way for the eastern expansion of the Louvre, but Molière's company was allowed to move into the abandoned theatre in the east wing of the Palais-Royal. After a period of refurbishment they opened there on 20 January 1661. In order to please his patron, Monsieur, who was so enthralled with entertainment and art that he was soon excluded from state affairs, Molière wrote and played "Dom Garcie de Navarre ou Le Prince jaloux" ("The Jealous Prince", 4 February 1661), a heroic comedy derived from a work of Cicognini's. Two other comedies of the same year were the successful "L'École des maris" ("The School for Husbands") and "Les Fâcheux", subtitled "Comédie faite pour les divertissements du Roi" (a comedy for the King's amusements) because it was performed during a series of parties that Nicolas Fouquet gave in honor of the sovereign. These entertainments led Jean-Baptiste Colbert to demand the arrest of Fouquet for wasting public money, and he was condemned to life imprisonment.
On 20 February 1662 Molière married Armande Béjart, whom he believed to be the sister of Madeleine. (She may instead have been her illegitimate daughter with the Duke of Modena.) The same year he premiered "L'École des femmes" ("The School for Wives"), subsequently regarded as a masterpiece. It poked fun at the limited education that was given to daughters of rich families, and reflected Molière's own marriage. Both this work and his marriage attracted much criticism. The play sparked the protest called the "Quarrel of L'École des femmes". On the artistic side he responded with two lesser-known works: "La Critique de "L'École des femmes"", in which he imagined the spectators of his previous work attending it. The piece mocks the people who had criticised "L'École des femmes" by showing them at dinner after watching the play; it addresses all the criticism raised about the piece by presenting the critics' arguments and then dismissing them. This was the so-called "Guerre comique" ("War of Comedy"), in which the opposite side was taken by writers like Donneau de Visé, Edmé Boursault, and Montfleury.
But more serious opposition was brewing, focusing on Molière's politics and his personal life. A so-called "parti des Dévots" arose in French high society, who protested against Molière's excessive "realism" and irreverence, which were causing some embarrassment. These people accused Molière of having married his daughter. The Prince of Conti, once Molière's friend, joined them. Molière had other enemies, too, among them the Jansenists and some traditional authors. However, the king expressed support for the author, granting him a pension and agreeing to be the godfather of Molière's first son. Boileau also supported him through statements that he included in his "Art poétique".
Molière's friendship with Jean-Baptiste Lully influenced him towards writing his "Le Mariage forcé" and "La Princesse d'Élide" (subtitled as "Comédie galante mêlée de musique et d'entrées de ballet"), written for royal ""divertissements"" at the Palace of Versailles.
"Tartuffe, ou L'Imposteur" was also performed at Versailles, in 1664, and created the greatest scandal of Molière's artistic career. Its depiction of the hypocrisy of the dominant classes was taken as an outrage and violently contested. It also aroused the wrath of the Jansenists and the play was banned.
Molière was always careful not to attack the institution of monarchy. He earned a position as one of the king's favourites and enjoyed his protection from the attacks of the court. The king allegedly suggested that Molière suspend performances of "Tartuffe", and the author rapidly wrote "Dom Juan ou le Festin de Pierre" to replace it. It was a strange work, derived from a work by Tirso de Molina and rendered in a prose that still seems modern today. It describes the story of an atheist who becomes a religious hypocrite and for this is punished by God. This work too was quickly suspended. The king, demonstrating his protection once again, became the new official sponsor of Molière's troupe.
With music by Lully, Molière presented "L'Amour médecin" ("Love Doctor" or "Medical Love"). Subtitles on this occasion reported that the work was given "par ordre du Roi" (by order of the king) and this work was received much more warmly than its predecessors.
In 1666, "Le Misanthrope" was produced. It is now widely regarded as Molière's most refined masterpiece, the one with the highest moral content, but it was little appreciated at its time. It caused the "conversion" of Donneau de Visé, who became fond of his theatre. But it was a commercial flop, forcing Molière to immediately write "Le médecin malgré lui" ("The Doctor Despite Himself"), a satire against the official sciences. This was a success despite a moral treatise by the Prince of Conti, criticizing the theater in general and Molière's in particular. In several of his plays, Molière depicted the physicians of his day as pompous individuals who speak (poor) Latin to impress others with false erudition, and know only clysters and bleedings as (ineffective) remedies.
After the "Mélicerte" and the "Pastorale comique", he tried again to perform a revised "Tartuffe" in 1667, this time with the name of "Panulphe" or "L'Imposteur". As soon as the King left Paris for a tour, Lamoignon and the archbishop banned the play. The King finally imposed respect for "Tartuffe" a few years later, after he had gained more power over the clergy.
Molière, now ill, wrote less. "Le Sicilien ou L'Amour peintre" was written for festivities at the castle of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and was followed in 1668 by "Amphitryon", inspired both by Plautus' work of the same name and Jean Rotrou's successful reconfiguration of the drama. With some conjecture, Molière's play can be seen to allude to the love affairs of Louis XIV, then king of France. "George Dandin, ou Le mari confondu" ("The Confounded Husband") was little appreciated, but success returned with "L'Avare" ("The Miser"), now very well known.
With Lully he again used music for "Monsieur de Pourceaugnac", for "Les Amants magnifiques", and finally for "Le Bourgeois gentilhomme" ("The Middle Class Gentleman"), another of his masterpieces. It is claimed to be particularly directed against Colbert, the minister who had condemned his old patron Fouquet. The collaboration with Lully ended with a "tragédie et ballet", "Psyché", written in collaboration with Pierre Corneille and Philippe Quinault.
In 1672, Madeleine Béjart died, and Molière suffered from this loss and from the worsening of his own illness. Nevertheless, he wrote a successful "Les Fourberies de Scapin" ("Scapin's Deceits"), a farce and a comedy in five acts. His following play, "La Comtesse d'Escarbagnas", is considered one of his lesser works.
"Les Femmes savantes" ("The Learned Ladies") of 1672 is considered another of Molière's masterpieces. It was born from the termination of the legal use of music in theater, since Lully had patented the opera in France (and taken most of the best available singers for his own performances), so Molière had to go back to his traditional genre. It was a great success, and it led to his last work (see below), which is still held in high esteem.
In his 14 years in Paris, Molière singlehandedly wrote 31 of the 85 plays performed on his stage.
Les Comédies-Ballets.
In 1661, Molière introduced the "comédies-ballets" in conjunction with "Les Fâcheux". These ballets were a transitional form of dance performance between the court ballets of Louis XIV and the art of professional theatre which was developing in the advent of the use of the proscenium stage. The "comédies-ballets" developed accidentally when Molière was enlisted to mount both a play and a ballet in the honor of Louis XIV and found that he did not have a big enough cast to meet these demands. Molière therefore decided to combine the ballet and the play so that the his goal could be met while the performers catch their breath and change costume. The risky move paid off and Molière was asked to produce twelve more "comédies-ballets" before his death. During the "comédies-ballets", Molière collaborated with Pierre Beauchamp. Beauchamp codified the five balletic positions of the feet and arms and was partly responsible for the creation of the Beauchamp-Feuillet dance notation. Molière also collaborated with Jean-Baptiste Lully. Lully was a dancer, choreographer, and composer, whose dominant reign at the Paris Opéra lasted fifteen years. Under his command, ballet and opera rightly became professional arts unto themselves. The "comédies-ballets" closely integrated dance with music and the action of the play and the style of continuity distinctly separated these performances from the court ballets of the time; additionally, the "comédies-ballets" demanded that both the dancers and the actors play an important role in advancing the story. Similar to the court ballets, both professionally trained dancers and courtiers socialized together at the "comédies-ballets" - Louis XIV even played the part of an Egyptian in Molière's "Le Mariage forcé" (1664) and also appeared as Neptune and Apollo in his retirement performance of "Les Amants magnifiques" (1670).
Death.
Molière suffered from pulmonary tuberculosis, possibly contracted when he was imprisoned for debt as a young man. One of the most famous moments in Molière's life was his last, which became legend: he collapsed on stage in a fit of coughing and haemorrhaging while performing in the last play he'd written, which had lavish ballets performed to the music of Marc-Antoine Charpentier and which ironically was entitled "Le Malade imaginaire" ("The Imaginary Invalid"). Molière insisted on completing his performance. Afterwards he collapsed again with another, larger haemorrhage before being taken home, where he died a few hours later, without receiving the last rites because two priests refused to visit him while a third arrived too late. The superstition that green brings bad luck to actors is said to originate from the colour of the clothing he was wearing at the time of his death.
Under French law at the time, actors were not allowed to be buried in the sacred ground of a cemetery. However, Molière's widow, Armande, asked the King if her spouse could be granted a normal funeral at night. The King agreed and Molière's body was buried in the part of the cemetery reserved for unbaptised infants.
In 1792 his remains were brought to the museum of French monuments and in 1817 transferred to Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, close to those of La Fontaine.
Reception of his works.
Though conventional thinkers, religious leaders, and medical professionals in Molière's time criticised his work, their ideas did not really diminish his widespread success with the public. Other playwrights and companies began to emulate his dramatic style in England and in France. Molière's works continued to garner positive feedback in 18th century England, but they were not so warmly welcomed in France at this time. However, during the French Restoration of the 19th century, Molière's comedies became popular with both the French public and the critics. Romanticists admired his plays for the unconventional individualism they portrayed. 20th century scholars have carried on this interest in Molière and his plays and have continued to study a wide array of issues relating to this playwright. Many critics now are shifting their attention from the philosophical, religious, and moral implications in his comedies to the more objective study of his comic technique.
Molière's works were translated into English prose by John Ozell in 1714, but the first complete version in English, by Baker and Miller in 1739, remained "influential" and was long reprinted. The first to offer full translations of Molière's verse plays such as "Tartuffe" into English verse was Curtis Hidden Page, who produced blank verse versions of three of the plays in his 1908 translation. Since then, notable translations have been made by Richard Wilbur, Donald M. Frame, and many others.
In his memoir "A Terrible Liar", actor Hume Cronyn writes that, in 1962, celebrated actor Laurence Olivier criticized Molière in a conversation with him. According to Cronyn, he mentioned to Olivier that he (Cronyn) was about to play the title role in "The Miser", and that Olivier then responded, "Molière? Funny as a baby's open grave." Cronyn comments on the incident: "You may imagine how that made me feel. Fortunately, he was dead wrong."
Author Martha Bellinger points out that:
Influence on French culture.
Molière is considered the creator of modern French comedy. Many words or phrases used in Molière's plays are still used in current French:
Portrayals of Molière.
Molière plays a small part in Alexandre Dumas's novel "The Vicomte of Bragelonne", in which he is seen taking inspiration from the muskeeter Porthos for his central character in Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.
Russian writer Mikhail Bulgakov wrote a semi-fictitious biography-tribute to Molière, titled "Life of Mr. de Molière". Written 1932-1933, first published 1962.
The 2000 film "Le Roi Danse" ("The King Dances"), in which Molière is played by Tchéky Karyo, shows his collaborations with Jean-Baptiste Lully, as well as his illness and on-stage death.
The French 1978 film titled "Molière" directed by Ariane Mnouchkine, presents his complete biography. It was in competition for the Palme d'Or at Cannes in 1978.
The 2007 French film "Molière" was more loosely based on the life of Molière, starring Romain Duris, Fabrice Luchini and Ludivine Sagnier.

</doc>
<doc id="51469" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51469" title="Mold">
Mold

A mold () or mould () is a fungus that grows in the form of multicellular filaments called "hyphae". In contrast, fungi that can adopt a single-celled growth habit are called yeasts.
Molds are a large and taxonomically diverse number of fungal species where the growth of hyphae results in discoloration and a fuzzy appearance, especially on food. The network of these tubular branching hyphae, called a mycelium, is considered a single organism. The hyphae are generally transparent, so the mycelium appears like very fine, fluffy white threads over the surface. Cross-walls (septa) may delimit connected compartments along the hyphae, each containing one or multiple, genetically identical nuclei. The dusty texture of many molds is caused by profuse production of asexual spores (conidia) formed by differentiation at the ends of hyphae. The mode of formation and shape of these spores is traditionally used to classify molds. Many of these spores are colored, making the fungus much more obvious to the human eye at this stage in its life-cycle.
Molds are considered to be microbes and do not form a specific taxonomic or phylogenetic grouping, but can be found in the divisions Zygomycota and Ascomycota. In the past, most molds were classified within the Deuteromycota.
Molds cause biodegradation of natural materials, which can be unwanted when it becomes food spoilage or damage to property. They also play important roles in biotechnology and food science in the production of various foods, beverages, antibiotics, pharmaceuticals and enzymes. Some diseases of animals and humans can be caused by certain molds: disease may result from allergic sensitivity to mold spores, from growth of pathogenic molds within the body, or from the effects of ingested or inhaled toxic compounds (mycotoxins) produced by molds.
Biology.
There are thousands of known species of molds, which have diverse life-styles including saprotrophs, mesophiles, psychrophiles and thermophiles and a very few opportunistic pathogens of humans. They all require moisture for growth and some live in aquatic environments. Like all fungi, molds derive energy not through photosynthesis but from the organic matter on which they live, utilising heterotrophy. Typically, molds secrete hydrolytic enzymes, mainly from the hyphal tips. These enzymes degrade complex biopolymers such as starch, cellulose and lignin into simpler substances which can be absorbed by the hyphae. In this way molds play a major role in causing decomposition of organic material, enabling the recycling of nutrients throughout ecosystems. Many molds also synthesise mycotoxins and siderophores which, together with lytic enzymes, inhibit the growth of competing microorganisms. Molds can also grow on stored food for animals and humans, making the food unpalatable or toxic and are thus a major source of food losses and illness. Many strategies for food preservation (salting, pickling, jams, bottling, freezing, drying) are to prevent or slow mold growth as well as growth of other microbes.
Molds reproduce by producing large numbers of small spores, which may contain a single nucleus or be multinucleate. Mold spores can be asexual (the products of mitosis) or sexual (the products of meiosis); many species can produce both types. Some molds produce small, hydrophobic spores that are adapted for wind dispersal and may remain airborne for long periods; in some the cell walls are darkly pigmented, providing resistance to damage by ultraviolet radiation. Other mold spores have slimy sheaths and are more suited to water dispersal. Mold spores are often spherical or ovoid single cells, but can be multicellular and variously shaped. Spores may cling to clothing or fur; some are able to survive extremes of temperature and pressure.
Although molds can grow on dead organic matter everywhere in nature, their presence is visible to the unaided eye only when they form large colonies. A mold colony does not consist of discrete organisms but is an interconnected network of hyphae called a mycelium. All growth occurs at hyphal tips, with cytoplasm and organelles flowing forwards as the hyphae advance over or through new food sources. Nutrients are absorbed at the hyphal tip. In artificial environments such as buildings, humidity and temperature are often stable enough to foster the growth of mold colonies, commonly seen as a downy or furry coating growing on food or other surfaces.
Few molds can begin growing at temperatures of or below, so food is typically refrigerated at this temperature. When conditions do not enable growth to take place, molds may remain alive in a dormant state depending on the species, within a large range of temperatures. The many different mold species vary enormously in their tolerance to temperature and humidity extremes. Certain molds can survive harsh conditions such as the snow-covered soils of Antarctica, refrigeration, highly acidic solvents, anti-bacterial soap and even petroleum products such as jet fuel.
Xerophilic molds are able to grow in relatively dry, salty, or sugary environments, where water activity (aw) is less than 0.85; other molds need more moisture.
Common molds.
Common genera of molds include:
Food production.
The molds are a group of "Aspergillus" species, notably "Aspergillus oryzae", and secondarily "A. sojae", that have been cultured in eastern Asia for many centuries. They are used to ferment a soybean and wheat mixture to make soybean paste and soy sauce. "Koji" molds break down the starch in rice, barley, sweet potatoes, etc., a process called saccharification, in the production of "sake", "shōchū" and other distilled spirits. "Koji" molds are also used in the preparation of Katsuobushi.
Red rice yeast is a product of the mold "Monascus purpureus" grown on rice, and is common in Asian diets. The yeast contains several compounds collectively known as monacolins, which are known to inhibit cholesterol synthesis. A study has shown that red rice yeast used as a dietary supplement, combined with fish oil and healthy lifestyle changes, may help reduce "bad" cholesterol as effectively as certain commercial statin drugs.
Some sausages, such as salami, incorporate starter cultures of molds to improve flavour and reduce bacterial spoilage during curing. "Penicillium nalgiovense", for example, may appear as a powdery white coating on some varieties of dry-cured sausage.
Other molds that have been used in food production include:
Pharmaceuticals from molds.
Alexander Fleming's accidental discovery of the antibiotic penicillin involved a "Penicillium" mold called "Penicillium notatum" (although the species identity is disputed as possibly being "Penicillium chrysogenum" or "Penicillium rubens"). Fleming continued to investigate Penicillin, showing that it could inhibit various types of bacteria found in infections and other ailments, but he was unable to produce the compound in large enough amounts necessary for production of a medicine. His work was expanded by a team at Oxford University; Clutterbuck, Lovell, and Raistrick, who began to work on the problem in 1931. This team was also unable to produce the pure compound in any large amount, and found that the purification process diminished its effectiveness and negated the anti-bacterial properties it had.
Howard Florey, Ernst Chain, Norman Heatley, Edward Abraham, also all at Oxford, continued the work. They enhanced and developed the concentration technique by using organic solutions rather than water, and created the "Oxford Unit" to measure penicillin concentration within a solution. They managed to purify the solution, increasing its concentration by 45-50 times, but found that a higher concentration was possible. Experiments were conducted and the results published in 1941, though the quantities of Penicillin produced were not always high enough for the treatments required. As this was during the Second World War, Florey sought USA Government involvement. With research teams in the UK and some in the US, industrial-scale production of crystallised penicillin was developed during 1941-1944 by the USDA and by Pfizer.
Several statin cholesterol-lowering drugs (such as lovastatin, from "Aspergillus terreus") are derived from molds.
The immunosuppressant drug cyclosporine, used to suppress the rejection of transplanted organs, is derived from the mold "Tolypocladium inflatum".
Health effects.
Molds are ubiquitous, and mold spores are a common component of household and workplace dust; however, when mold spores are present in large quantities, they can present a health hazard to humans, potentially causing allergic reactions and respiratory problems.
Some molds also produce mycotoxins that can pose serious health risks to humans and animals. Some studies claim that exposure to high levels of mycotoxins can lead to neurological problems and in some cases, death. Prolonged exposure, e.g. daily home exposure, may be particularly harmful. Research on the health impacts of mold has not been conclusive. The term "toxic mold" refers to molds that produce mycotoxins, such as "Stachybotrys chartarum", and not to all molds in general.
Mold in the home can usually be found in damp, dark or steamy areas e.g. bathroom or kitchen, cluttered storage areas, recently flooded areas, basement areas, plumbing spaces, areas with poor ventilation and outdoors in humid environments. Symptoms caused by mold allergy are watery, itchy eyes, a chronic cough, headaches or migraines, difficulty breathing, rashes, tiredness, sinus problems, nasal blockage and frequent sneezing.
Molds can also pose a hazard to human and animal health when they are consumed following the growth of certain mold species in stored food. Some species produce toxic secondary metabolites, collectively termed mycotoxins including aflatoxins, ochratoxins, fumonisins, trichothecenes, citrinin, and patulin. These toxic properties may be used for the benefit of humans when the toxicity is directed against other organisms; for example, penicillin adversely affects the growth of Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. Clostridium species), certain spirochetes and certain fungi.
Growth in buildings and homes.
Mold growth in buildings can lead to a variety of health problems. Various practices can be followed to mitigate mold issues in buildings, the most important of which is to reduce moisture levels that can facilitate mold growth. Removal of affected materials after the source of moisture has been reduced and/or eliminated may be necessary for remediation.
Use in art.
Various artists have used mold in various artistic fashions. Daniele Del Nero, for example, constructs scale models of houses and office buildings and then induces mold to grow on them, giving them a spooky, reclaimed-by-nature look. Staci Levy sandblasts enlarged images of mold onto glass, then allows mold to grow in the crevasses she has made, creating a macro-micro portrait.

</doc>
