<doc id="84839" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84839" title="Jan Tschichold">
Jan Tschichold

Jan Tschichold (2 April 1902 Leipzig, Germany – 11 August 1974 Locarno, Switzerland) was a typographer, book designer, teacher and writer.
Life.
Tschichold was the son of a provincial signwriter, and he was trained in calligraphy. This artisan background and calligraphic training set him apart from almost all other noted typographers of the time, since they had inevitably trained in architecture or the fine arts. It also may help explain why he never worked with handmade papers and custom fonts as many typographers did, preferring instead to use stock fonts on a careful choice from commercial paper stocks.
After the election of Hitler in Germany, all designers had to register with the Ministry of Culture, and all teaching posts were threatened for anyone who was sympathetic to communism. Soon after Tschichold had taken up a teaching post in Munich at the behest of Paul Renner, they both were denounced as "cultural Bolshevists". Ten days after the Nazis surged to power in March 1933, Tschichold and his wife were arrested. During the arrest, Soviet posters were found in his flat, casting him under suspicion of collaboration with communists. All copies of Tschichold's books were seized by the Gestapo ""for the protection of the German people"". After six weeks a policeman somehow found him tickets for Switzerland, and he and his family managed to escape Nazi Germany in August 1933.
Apart from two longer stays in England in 1937 (at the invitation of the Penrose Annual), and 1947–1949 (at the invitation of Ruari McLean, the British typographer, with whom he worked on the design of Penguin Books), Tschichold lived in Switzerland for the rest of his life. Jan Tschichold died in the hospital at Locarno in 1974.
Design.
Tschichold had converted to Modernist design principles in 1923 after visiting the first Weimar Bauhaus exhibition. He became a leading advocate of Modernist design: first with an influential 1925 magazine supplement; then a 1927 personal exhibition; then with his most noted work "Die neue Typographie". This book was a manifesto of modern design, in which he condemned all typefaces but sans-serif (called "Grotesk" in Germany). He also favoured non-centered design (e.g., on title pages), and codified many other Modernist design rules. He advocated the use of standardised paper sizes for all printed matter, and made some of the first clear explanations of the effective use of different sizes and weights of type in order to quickly and easily convey information. This book was followed with a series of practical manuals on the principles of Modernist typography which had a wide influence among ordinary workers and printers in Germany. Yet, despite his visits to England just before the war, only about four articles by Tschichold had been translated into English by 1945.
Although "Die neue Typographie" remains a classic, Tschichold slowly abandoned his rigid beliefs from around 1932 onwards (e.g. his Saskia typeface of 1932, and his acceptance of classical Roman typefaces for body-type) as he moved back towards Classicism in print design. He later condemned "Die neue Typographie" as too extreme. He also went so far as to condemn Modernist design in general as being authoritarian and inherently fascistic.
Between 1947–1949 Tschichold lived in England where he oversaw the redesign of 500 paperbacks published by Penguin Books, leaving them with a standardized set of typographic rules, the "Penguin Composition Rules". Although he gave Penguin's books (particularly the Pelican range) a unified look and enforced many of the typographic practices that are taken for granted today, he allowed the nature of each work to dictate its look, with varied covers and title pages. In working for a firm that made cheap mass-market paperbacks, he was following a line of work—in cheap popular culture forms (e.g. film posters)—that he had always pursued during his career.
His abandonment of Modernist principles meant that, even though he was living in Switzerland after the war, he was not at the centre of the post-war Swiss International Typographic Style. Unimpressed by the use of realist or neo-grotesque typefaces, which he saw as a revival of poorly-designed models, his survey of typefaces in advertising deliberately made no mention of such designs, save for a reference to 'survivals from the nineteenth-century which have recently enjoyed a short-lived popularity.'
Typefaces.
Between 1926 and 1929, he designed a “universal alphabet” to clean up the few multigraphs and non-phonetic spellings in the German language. For example, he devised brand new characters to replace the multigraphs "ch" and "sch". His intentions were to change the spelling by systematically replacing "eu" with "oi", "w" with "v", and "z" with "ts". Long vowels were indicated by a macron below them, though the umlaut was still above. The alphabet was presented in one typeface, which was sans-serif and without capital letters.
Typefaces Tschichold designed include Transit (1931), Saskia (1931/1932), Zeus (1931) and Sabon (1966/1967) [http://www.adobe.com/type/browser/P/P_088.jhtml], named after Jacques Sabon.
Sabon was designed to be a typeface that would give the same reproduction on both Monotype and Linotype systems. It was used early after its release by Bradbury Thompson to set the Washburn College Bible. A “Sabon Next” was later released by Linotype as an ‘interpretation’ of Tschichold's original Sabon.

</doc>
<doc id="84840" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84840" title="Kite (geometry)">
Kite (geometry)

In Euclidean geometry, a kite is a quadrilateral whose four sides can be grouped into two pairs of equal-length sides that are adjacent to each other. In contrast, a parallelogram also has two pairs of equal-length sides, but they are opposite to each other rather than adjacent. Kite quadrilaterals are named for the wind-blown, flying kites, which often have this shape and which are in turn named for a bird. Kites are also known as deltoids, but the word "deltoid" may also refer to a deltoid curve, an unrelated geometric object.
A kite, as defined above, may be either convex or concave, but the word "kite" is often restricted to the convex variety. A concave kite is sometimes called a "dart" or "arrowhead", and is a type of pseudotriangle.
Special cases.
If all four sides of a kite have the same length (that is, if the kite is equilateral), it must be a rhombus.
If a kite is equiangular, meaning that all four of its angles are equal, then it must also be equilateral and thus a square. 
A kite with three equal 108° angles and one 36° angle forms the convex hull of the lute of Pythagoras.
The kites that are also cyclic quadrilaterals (i.e. the kites that can be inscribed in a circle) are exactly the ones formed from two congruent right triangles. That is, for these kites the two equal angles on opposite sides of the symmetry axis are each 90 degrees. These shapes are called right kites and they are in fact bicentric quadrilaterals (below to the left). Among all the bicentric quadrilaterals with a given two circle radii, the one with maximum area is a right kite.
There are only eight polygons that can tile the plane in such a way that reflecting any tile across any one of its edges produces another tile; one of them is a right kite, with 60°, 90°, and 120° angles. The tiling that it produces by its reflections is the deltoidal trihexagonal tiling.
Among all quadrilaterals, the shape that has the greatest ratio of its perimeter to its diameter is an equidiagonal kite with angles π/3, 5π/12, 5π/6, 5π/12. Its four vertices lie at the three corners and one of the side midpoints of the Reuleaux triangle (above to the right).
In non-Euclidean geometry, a Lambert quadrilateral is a right kite with three right angles.
Characterizations.
A quadrilateral is a kite if and only if any one of the following conditions is true:
Symmetry.
The kites are the quadrilaterals that have an axis of symmetry along one of their diagonals. Any non-self-crossing quadrilateral that has an axis of symmetry must be either a kite (if the axis of symmetry is a diagonal) or an isosceles trapezoid (if the axis of symmetry passes through the midpoints of two sides); these include as special cases the rhombus and the rectangle respectively, which have two axes of symmetry each, and the square which is both a kite and an isosceles trapezoid and has four axes of symmetry. If crossings are allowed, the list of quadrilaterals with axes of symmetry must be expanded to also include the antiparallelograms.
Basic properties.
Every kite is orthodiagonal, meaning that its two diagonals are at right angles to each other. Moreover, one of the two diagonals (the symmetry axis) is the perpendicular bisector of the other, and is also the angle bisector of the two angles it meets.
One of the two diagonals of a convex kite divides it into two isosceles triangles; the other (the axis of symmetry) divides the kite into two congruent triangles. The two interior angles of a kite that are on opposite sides of the symmetry axis are equal.
Area.
As is true more generally for any orthodiagonal quadrilateral, the area "A" of a kite may be calculated as half the product of the lengths of the diagonals "p" and "q":
Alternatively, if "a" and "b" are the lengths of two unequal sides, and "θ" is the angle between unequal sides, then the area is
Tangent circles.
Every "convex" kite has an inscribed circle; that is, there exists a circle that is tangent to all four sides. Therefore, every convex kite is a tangential quadrilateral. Additionally, if a convex kite is not a rhombus, there is another circle, outside the kite, tangent to the lines that pass through its four sides; therefore, every convex kite that is not a rhombus is an ex-tangential quadrilateral.
For every "concave" kite there exist two circles tangent to all four (possibly extended) sides: one is interior to the kite and touches the two sides opposite from the concave angle, while the other circle is exterior to the kite and touches the kite on the two edges incident to the concave angle.
Dual properties.
Kites and isosceles trapezoids are dual: the polar figure of a kite is an isosceles trapezoid, and vice versa. The side-angle duality of kites and isosceles trapezoids are compared in the table below.
Tilings and polyhedra.
All kites tile the plane by repeated inversion around the midpoints of their edges, as do more generally all quadrilaterals. A kite with angles π/3, π/2, 2π/3, π/2 can also tile the plane by repeated reflection across its edges; the resulting tessellation, the deltoidal trihexagonal tiling, superposes a tessellation of the plane by regular hexagons and isosceles triangles.
The deltoidal icositetrahedron, deltoidal hexecontahedron, and trapezohedron are polyhedra with congruent kite-shaped facets. There are an infinite number of uniform tilings of the hyperbolic plane by kites, the simplest of which is the deltoidal triheptagonal tiling.
Kites and darts in which the two isosceles triangles forming the kite have apex angles of 2π/5 and 4π/5 represent one of two sets of essential tiles in the Penrose tiling, an aperiodic tiling of the plane discovered by mathematical physicist Roger Penrose.
Face-transivive self-tesselation of the sphere, Euclidean plane, and hyperbolic plane with kites occurs as uniform duals: for Coxeter group [p,q], with any set of p,q between 3 and infinity, as this table partially shows up to q=6. When p=q, the kites become rhombi.
Conditions for when a tangential quadrilateral is a kite.
A tangential quadrilateral is a kite if and only if any one of the following conditions is true:
If the diagonals in a tangential quadrilateral "ABCD" intersect at "P", and the incircles in triangles "ABP", "BCP", "CDP", "DAP" have radii "r"1, "r"2, "r"3, and "r"4 respectively, then the quadrilateral is a kite if and only if
If the excircles to the same four triangles opposite the vertex "P" have radii "R"1, "R"2, "R"3, and "R"4 respectively, then the quadrilateral is a kite if and only if

</doc>
<doc id="84841" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84841" title="Choeung Ek">
Choeung Ek

Choeung Ek ( ), the site of a former orchard and mass grave of victims of the Khmer Rouge - killed between 1975 and 1979 - about south of Phnom Penh, Cambodia, is the best-known of the sites known as The Killing Fields, where the Khmer Rouge regime executed over one million people between 1975 and 1979. Mass graves containing 8,895 bodies were discovered at Choeung Ek after the fall of the Khmer Rouge regime. Many of the dead were former political prisoners who were kept by the Khmer Rouge in their Tuol Sleng detention center.
Today, Choeung Ek is a memorial, marked by a Buddhist stupa. The stupa has acrylic glass sides and is filled with more than 5,000 human skulls. Some of the lower levels are opened during the day so that the skulls can be seen directly. Many have been shattered or smashed in.
Tourists are encouraged by the Cambodian government to visit Choeung Ek. Apart from the stupa, there are pits from which the bodies were exhumed. Human bones still litter the site.
On May 3, 2005, the Municipality of Phnom Penh announced that they had entered into a 30-year agreement with JC Royal Co. to develop the memorial at Choeung Ek. As part of the agreement, they are not to disturb the remains still present in the field.
The film "The Killing Fields" is a dramatized portrayal of events like those that took place at Choeung Ek.

</doc>
<doc id="84846" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84846" title="Scranton (disambiguation)">
Scranton (disambiguation)

Scranton, Pennsylvania is a city in the United States.
Scranton may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84847" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84847" title="Hamden">
Hamden

Hamden is the name of several places in the United States of America:

</doc>
<doc id="84848" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84848" title="Hampden">
Hampden

Hampden may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84849" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84849" title="Battle of Antietam">
Battle of Antietam

The Battle of Antietam , also known as the Battle of Sharpsburg, particularly in the South, fought on September 17, 1862, near Sharpsburg, Maryland and Antietam Creek as part of the Maryland Campaign, was the first major battle in the American Civil War to take place on Union soil. It is the bloodiest single-day battle in American history, with a combined tally of 22,717 dead, wounded, or missing.
After pursuing Confederate General Robert E. Lee into Maryland, Union Army Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan launched attacks against Lee's army, in defensive positions behind Antietam Creek. At dawn on September 17, Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker's corps mounted a powerful assault on Lee's left flank. Attacks and counterattacks swept across Miller's Cornfield, and fighting swirled around the Dunker Church. Union assaults against the Sunken Road eventually pierced the Confederate center, but the Federal advantage was not followed up. In the afternoon, Union Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside's corps entered the action, capturing a stone bridge over Antietam Creek and advancing against the Confederate right. At a crucial moment, Confederate Maj. Gen. A. P. Hill's division arrived from Harpers Ferry and launched a surprise counterattack, driving back Burnside and ending the battle. Although outnumbered two-to-one, Lee committed his entire force, while McClellan sent in less than three-quarters of his army, enabling Lee to fight the Federals to a standstill. During the night, both armies consolidated their lines. In spite of crippling casualties, Lee continued to skirmish with McClellan throughout September 18, while removing his battered army south of the Potomac River.
Despite having superiority of numbers, McClellan's attacks failed to achieve force concentration, which allowed Lee to counter by shifting forces and moving interior lines to meet each challenge. Therefore, despite ample reserve forces that could have been deployed to exploit localized successes, McClellan failed to destroy Lee's army. 
McClellan had halted Lee's invasion of Maryland, but Lee was able to withdraw his army back to Virginia without interference from the cautious McClellan. Although the battle was tactically inconclusive, the Confederate troops had withdrawn first from the battlefield, making it, in military terms, a Union victory. It was a sufficiently significant victory to give President Abraham Lincoln the confidence to announce his Emancipation Proclamation, which discouraged the British and French governments from pursuing any potential plans to recognize the Confederacy.
Background.
Military situation and political objectives.
Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia—about 55,000 men—entered the state of Maryland on September 3, 1862, following their victory at Second Bull Run on August 30. Emboldened by success, the Confederate leadership intended to take the war into enemy territory. Lee's invasion of Maryland was intended to run simultaneously with an invasion of Kentucky by the armies of Braxton Bragg and Kirby Smith. It was also necessary for logistical reasons, as northern Virginia's farms had been stripped bare of food. Based on events such as the Baltimore riots in the spring of 1861 and the fact that President Lincoln had to pass through the city in disguise en route to his inauguration, Confederate leaders assumed that Maryland would welcome the Confederate forces warmly. They sang the tune "Maryland, My Maryland!" as they marched, but by the fall of 1862 pro-Union sentiment was winning out, especially in the western parts of the state. Civilians generally hid inside their houses as Lee's army passed through their towns, or watched in cold silence, while the Army of the Potomac was cheered and encouraged. Some Confederate politicians, including President Jefferson Davis, believed that the prospect of foreign recognition would increase if the Confederacy won a military victory on Union soil; such a victory might gain recognition and financial support from the United Kingdom and France, although there is no evidence that Lee thought the Confederacy should base its military plans on this possibility.
Plans and intelligence.
While McClellan's 75,500-man Army of the Potomac was moving to intercept Lee, two Union soldiers (Corporal Barton W. Mitchell and First Sergeant John M. Bloss of the 27th Indiana Volunteer Infantry) discovered a mislaid copy of Lee's detailed battle plans—Special Order 191—wrapped around three cigars. The order indicated that Lee had divided his army and dispersed portions geographically (to Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, and Hagerstown, Maryland), thus making each subject to isolation and defeat if McClellan could move quickly enough. McClellan waited about 18 hours before deciding to take advantage of this intelligence and reposition his forces, thus squandering an opportunity to defeat Lee decisively.
Initial movements in the Maryland Campaign.
There were two significant engagements in the Maryland campaign prior to the major battle of Antietam: Maj. Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson's capture of Harpers Ferry and McClellan's assault through the Blue Ridge Mountains in the Battle of South Mountain. The former was significant because a large portion of Lee's army was absent from the start of the battle of Antietam, attending to the surrender of the Union garrison; the latter because stout Confederate defenses at two passes through the mountains delayed McClellan's advance enough for Lee to concentrate the remainder of his army at Sharpsburg.
Opposing forces.
Union.
Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan's Army of the Potomac, bolstered by units absorbed from John Pope's Army of Virginia, included six infantry corps.
The I Corps, under Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, consisted of the divisions of:
The II Corps, under Maj. Gen. Edwin V. Sumner, consisted of the divisions of:
The V Corps, under Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter, consisted of the divisions of:
The VI Corps, under Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin, consisted of the divisions of:
The IX Corps, under Maj. Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside (Brig. Gen. Jacob D. Cox exercised operational command during the battle), consisted of the divisions of:
The XII Corps, under Maj. Gen. Joseph K. Mansfield, consisted of the divisions of:
The cavalry division of Brig. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton consisted of the brigades of Maj. Charles J. Whiting and Cols. John F. Farnsworth, Richard H. Rush, Andrew T. McReynolds, and Benjamin F. Davis.
Confederate.
General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia was organized into two large infantry corps.
The First Corps, under Maj. Gen. James Longstreet, consisted of the divisions of:
The Second Corps, under Maj. Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson, consisted of the divisions of:
The remaining units were the Cavalry Corps, under Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart, and the reserve artillery, commanded by Brig. Gen. William N. Pendleton. The Second Corps was organized with artillery attached to each division, in contrast to the First Corps, which reserved its artillery at the corps level.
Prelude to battle.
Disposition of armies.
Near the town of Sharpsburg, Lee deployed his available forces behind Antietam Creek along a low ridge, starting on September 15. While it was an effective defensive position, it was not an impregnable one. The terrain provided excellent cover for infantrymen, with rail and stone fences, outcroppings of limestone, and little hollows and swales. The creek to their front was only a minor barrier, ranging from 60 to 100 feet (18–30 m) in width, and was fordable in places and crossed by three stone bridges each a mile (1.5 km) apart. It was also a precarious position because the Confederate rear was blocked by the Potomac River and only a single crossing point, Boteler's Ford at Shepherdstown, was nearby should retreat be necessary. (The ford at Williamsport, Maryland, was northwest from Sharpsburg and had been used by Jackson in his march to Harpers Ferry. The disposition of Union forces during the battle made it impractical to consider retreating in that direction.) And on September 15, the force under Lee's immediate command consisted of no more than 18,000 men, only a third the size of the Federal army.
The first two Union divisions arrived on the afternoon of September 15 and the bulk of the remainder of the army late that evening. Although an immediate Union attack on the morning of September 16 would have had an overwhelming advantage in numbers, McClellan's trademark caution and his belief that Lee had as many as 100,000 men at Sharpsburg caused him to delay his attack for a day. This gave the Confederates more time to prepare defensive positions and allowed Longstreet's corps to arrive from Hagerstown and Jackson's corps, minus A.P. Hill's division, to arrive from Harpers Ferry. Jackson defended the left (northern) flank, anchored on the Potomac, Longstreet the right (southern) flank, anchored on the Antietam, a line that was about 4 miles (6 km) long. (As the battle progressed and Lee shifted units, these corps boundaries overlapped considerably.)
On the evening of September 16, McClellan ordered Hooker's I Corps to cross Antietam Creek and probe the enemy positions. Meade's division cautiously attacked Hood's troops near the East Woods. After darkness fell, artillery fire continued as McClellan positioned his troops for the next day's fighting. McClellan's plan was to overwhelm the enemy's left flank. He arrived at this decision because of the configuration of bridges over the Antietam. The lower bridge (which would soon be named Burnside Bridge) was dominated by Confederate positions on the bluffs overlooking it. The middle bridge, on the road from Boonsboro, was subject to artillery fire from the heights near Sharpsburg. But the upper bridge was 2 miles (3 km) east of the Confederate guns and could be crossed safely. McClellan planned to commit more than half his army to the assault, starting with two corps, supported by a third, and if necessary a fourth. He intended to launch a simultaneous diversionary attack against the Confederate right with a fifth corps, and he was prepared to strike the center with his reserves if either attack succeeded. The skirmish in the East Woods served to signal McClellan's intentions to Lee, who prepared his defenses accordingly. He shifted men to his left flank and sent urgent messages to his two commanders who had not yet arrived on the battlefield: Lafayette McLaws with two divisions and A.P. Hill with one division.
The terrain and its consequences.
McClellan's plans were ill-coordinated and were executed poorly. He issued to each of his subordinate commanders only the orders for his own corps, not general orders describing the entire battle plan. The terrain of the battlefield made it "difficult for those commanders to monitor events outside of their sectors", and McClellan's headquarters were more than a mile in the rear (at the Philip Pry house, east of the creek), making it difficult for him to control the separate corps. "Therefore, the battle progressed the next day as essentially three separate, mostly uncoordinated battles: morning in the northern end of the battlefield, midday in the center, and afternoon in the south". This lack of coordination and concentration of McClellan's forces almost completely nullified the two-to-one advantage the Union enjoyed and allowed Lee to shift his defensive forces to meet each offensive.
Battle.
Morning phase.
"Location": Northern end of the battlefield
The Cornfield.
The battle opened at dawn (about 5:30 a.m.) on September 17 with an attack down the Hagerstown Turnpike by the Union I Corps under Joseph Hooker. Hooker's objective was the plateau on which sat the Dunker Church, a modest whitewashed building belonging to a local sect of German Baptists. Hooker had approximately 8,600 men, little more than the 7,700 defenders under Stonewall Jackson, and this slight disparity was more than offset by the Confederates' strong defensive positions. Abner Doubleday's division moved on Hooker's right, James Ricketts's moved on the left into the East Woods, and George Meade's Pennsylvania Reserves division deployed in the center and slightly to the rear. Jackson's defense consisted of the divisions under Alexander Lawton and John R. Jones in line from the West Woods, across the Turnpike, and along the southern end of the Miller Cornfield. Four brigades were held in reserve inside the West Woods.
As the first Union men emerged from the North Woods and into the Cornfield, an artillery duel erupted. Confederate fire was from the horse artillery batteries under Jeb Stuart to the west and four batteries under Col. Stephen D. Lee on the high ground across the pike from the Dunker Church to the south. Union return fire was from nine batteries on the ridge behind the North Woods and twenty 20-pounder Parrott rifles, 2 miles (3 km) east of Antietam Creek. The conflagration caused heavy casualties on both sides and was described by Col. Lee as "artillery Hell."
Seeing the glint of Confederate bayonets concealed in the Cornfield, Hooker halted his infantry and brought up four batteries of artillery, which fired shell and canister over the heads of the Federal infantry, covering the field. All at once, the cornfield exploded into chaos as a savage battle raged through the area. Men beat each other over the head with rifle butts and stabbed each other with bayonets. Officers rode around on their horses swearing and cursing and yelling orders no one could hear in the noise. Rifles became hot and fouled from too much firing. The air was filled with a hail of bullets and shells.
Meade's 1st Brigade of Pennsylvanians, under Brig. Gen. Truman Seymour, began advancing through the East Woods and exchanged fire with Colonel James Walker's brigade of Alabama, Georgia, and North Carolina troops. As Walker's men forced Seymour's back, aided by Lee's artillery fire, Ricketts's division entered the Cornfield, also to be torn up by artillery. Brig. Gen. Abram Duryée's brigade marched directly into volleys from Colonel Marcellus Douglass's Georgia brigade. Enduring heavy fire from a range of and gaining no advantage because of a lack of reinforcements, Duryée ordered a withdrawal.
The reinforcements that Duryée had expected—brigades under Brig. Gen. George L. Hartsuff and Col. William A. Christian—had difficulties reaching the scene. Hartsuff was wounded by a shell, and Christian dismounted and fled to the rear in terror. When the men were rallied and advanced into the Cornfield, they met the same artillery and infantry fire as their predecessors. As the superior Union numbers began to tell, the Louisiana "Tiger" Brigade under Harry Hays entered the fray and forced the Union men back to the East Woods. The casualties received by the 12th Massachusetts Infantry, 67%, were the highest of any unit that day. The Tigers were beaten back eventually when the Federals brought up a battery of 3-inch ordnance rifles and rolled them directly into the Cornfield, point-blank fire that slaughtered the Tigers, who lost 323 of their 500 men.
While the Cornfield remained a bloody stalemate, Federal advances a few hundred yards to the west were more successful. Brig. Gen. John Gibbon's 4th Brigade of Doubleday's division (recently named the Iron Brigade) began advancing down and astride the turnpike, into the cornfield, and in the West Woods, pushing aside Jackson's men. They were halted by a charge of 1,150 men from Starke's brigade, leveling heavy fire from away. The Confederate brigade withdrew after being exposed to fierce return fire from the Iron Brigade, and Starke was mortally wounded. The Union advance on the Dunker Church resumed and cut a large gap in Jackson's defensive line, which teetered near collapse. Although the cost was steep, Hooker's corps was making steady progress.
Confederate reinforcements arrived just after 7 a.m. The divisions under McLaws and Richard H. Anderson arrived following a night march from Harpers Ferry. Around 7:15, General Lee moved George T. Anderson's Georgia brigade from the right flank of the army to aid Jackson. At 7 a.m., Hood's division of 2,300 men advanced through the West Woods and pushed the Union troops back through the Cornfield again. The Texans attacked with particular ferocity because as they were called from their reserve position they were forced to interrupt the first hot breakfast they had had in days. They were aided by three brigades of D.H. Hill's division arriving from the Mumma Farm, southeast of the Cornfield, and by Jubal Early's brigade, pushing through the West Woods from the Nicodemus Farm, where they had been supporting Jeb Stuart's horse artillery. Some officers of the Iron Brigade rallied men around the artillery pieces of Battery B, 4th U.S. Artillery, and Gibbon himself saw to it that his previous unit did not lose a single caisson. Hood's men bore the brunt of the fighting, however, and paid a heavy price—60% casualties—but they were able to prevent the defensive line from crumbling and held off the I Corps. When asked by a fellow officer where his division was, Hood replied, "Dead on the field."
Hooker's men had also paid heavily but without achieving their objectives. After two hours and 2,500 casualties, they were back where they started. The Cornfield, an area about deep and wide, was a scene of indescribable destruction. It was estimated that the Cornfield changed hands no fewer than 15 times in the course of the morning. Major Rufus R. Dawes, who assumed command of Iron Brigade's 6th Wisconsin Regiment during the battle, later compared the fighting around the Hagerstown Turnpike with the stone wall at Fredericksburg, Spotsylvania's "Bloody Angle", and the slaughter pen of Cold Harbor, insisting that "the Antietam Turnpike surpassed them all in manifest evidence of slaughter." Hooker called for support from the 7,200 men of Mansfield's XII Corps.
Half of Mansfield's men were raw recruits, and Mansfield was also inexperienced, having taken command only two days before. Although he was a veteran of 40 years' service, he had never led large numbers of soldiers in combat. Concerned that his men would bolt under fire, he marched them in a formation that was known as "column of companies, closed in mass," a bunched-up formation in which a regiment was arrayed ten ranks deep instead of the normal two. As his men entered the East Woods, they presented an excellent artillery target, "almost as good a target as a barn." Mansfield himself was shot in the chest and died the next day. Alpheus Williams assumed temporary command of the XII Corps.
The new recruits of Mansfield's 1st Division made no progress against Hood's line, which was reinforced by brigades of D.H. Hill's division under Colquitt and McRae. The 2nd Division of the XII Corps, under George Sears Greene, however, broke through McRae's men, who fled under the mistaken belief that they were about to be trapped by a flanking attack. This breach of the line forced Hood and his men, outnumbered, to regroup in the West Woods, where they had started the day. Greene was able to reach the Dunker Church, Hooker's original objective, and drove off Stephen Lee's batteries. Federal forces held most of the ground to the east of the turnpike.
Hooker attempted to gather the scattered remnants of his I Corps to continue the assault, but a Confederate sharpshooter spotted the general's conspicuous white horse and shot Hooker through the foot. Command of his I Corps fell to General Meade, since Hooker's senior subordinate, James B. Ricketts, had also been wounded. But with Hooker removed from the field, there was no general left with the authority to rally the men of the I and XII Corps. Greene's men came under heavy fire from the West Woods and withdrew from the Dunker Church.
In an effort to turn the Confederate left flank and relieve the pressure on Mansfield's men, Sumner's II Corps was ordered at 7:20 a.m. to send two divisions into battle. Sedgwick's division of 5,400 men was the first to ford the Antietam, and they entered the East Woods with the intention of turning left and forcing the Confederates south into the assault of Ambrose Burnside's IX Corps. But the plan went awry. They became separated from William H. French's division, and at 9 a.m. Sumner, who was accompanying the division, launched the attack with an unusual battle formation—the three brigades in three long lines, men side-by-side, with only 50 to separating the lines. They were assaulted first by Confederate artillery and then from three sides by the divisions of Early, Walker, and McLaws, and in less than half an hour Sedgwick's men were forced to retreat in great disorder to their starting point with over 2,200 casualties, including Sedgwick himself, who was taken out of action for several months by a wound. Sumner has been condemned by most historians for his "reckless" attack, his lack of coordination with the I and XII Corps headquarters, losing control of French's division when he accompanied Sedgwick's, failing to perform adequate reconnaissance prior to launching his attack, and selecting the unusual battle formation that was so effectively flanked by the Confederate counterattack. Historian M.V. Armstrong's recent scholarship, however, has determined that Sumner did perform appropriate reconnaissance and his decision to attack where he did was justified by the information available to him.
The final actions in the morning phase of the battle were around 10 a.m., when two regiments of the XII Corps advanced, only to be confronted by the division of John G. Walker, newly arrived from the Confederate right. They fought in the area between the Cornfield in the West Woods, but soon Walker's men were forced back by two brigades of Greene's division, and the Federal troops seized some ground in the West Woods.
The morning phase ended with casualties on both sides of almost 13,000, including two Union corps commanders.
Midday phase.
"Location": Center of the Confederate line
The Sunken Road: ""Bloody Lane"".
By midday, the action had shifted to the center of the Confederate line. Sumner had accompanied the morning attack of Sedgwick's division, but another of his divisions, under French, lost contact with Sumner and Sedgwick and inexplicably headed south. Eager for an opportunity to see combat, French found skirmishers in his path and ordered his men forward. By this time, Sumner's aide (and son) located French, described the terrible fighting in the West Woods and relayed an order for him to divert Confederate attention by attacking their center.
French confronted D.H. Hill's division. Hill commanded about 2,500 men, less than half the number under French, and three of his five brigades had been torn up during the morning combat. This sector of Longstreet's line was theoretically the weakest. But Hill's men were in a strong defensive position, atop a gradual ridge, in a sunken road worn down by years of wagon traffic, which formed a natural trench.
French launched a series of brigade-sized assaults against Hill's improvised breastworks at around 9:30 a.m. The first brigade to attack, mostly inexperienced troops commanded by Brig. Gen. Max Weber, was quickly cut down by heavy rifle fire; neither side deployed artillery at this point. The second attack, more raw recruits under Col. Dwight Morris, was also subjected to heavy fire but managed to beat back a counterattack by the Alabama Brigade of Robert Rodes. The third, under Brig. Gen. Nathan Kimball, included three veteran regiments, but they also fell to fire from the sunken road. French's division suffered 1,750 casualties (of his 5,700 men) in under an hour.
Reinforcements were arriving on both sides, and by 10:30 a.m. Robert E. Lee sent his final reserve division—some 3,400 men under Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson—to bolster Hill's line and extend it to the right, preparing an attack that would envelop French's left flank. But at the same time, the 4,000 men of Maj. Gen. Israel B. Richardson's division arrived on French's left. This was the last of Sumner's three divisions, which had been held up in the rear by McClellan as he organized his reserve forces. Richardson's fresh troops struck the first blow.
Leading off the fourth attack of the day against the sunken road was the Irish Brigade of Brig. Gen. Thomas F. Meagher. As they advanced with emerald green flags snapping in the breeze, a regimental chaplain, Father William Corby, rode back and forth across the front of the formation shouting words of conditional absolution prescribed by the Roman Catholic Church for those who were about to die. (Corby would later perform a similar service at Gettysburg in 1863.) The mostly Irish immigrants lost 540 men to heavy volleys before they were ordered to withdraw.
Gen. Richardson personally dispatched the brigade of Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell into battle around noon (after being told that Caldwell was in the rear, behind a haystack), and finally the tide turned. Anderson's Confederate division had been little help to the defenders after Gen. Anderson was wounded early in the fighting. Other key leaders were lost as well, including George B. Anderson (no relation; Anderson's successor, Col. Charles C. Tew of the 2nd North Carolina, was killed minutes after assuming command) and Col. John B. Gordon of the 6th Alabama. (Gordon received 5 serious wounds in the fight, twice in his right leg, twice in the left arm, and once in the face. He lay unconscious, face down in his cap, and later told colleagues that he should have smothered in his own blood, except for the act of an unidentified Yankee, who had earlier shot a hole in his cap, which allowed the blood to drain.) Rodes was wounded in the thigh but was still on the field. These losses contributed directly to the confusion of the following events.
As Caldwell's brigade advanced around the right flank of the Confederates, Col. Francis C. Barlow and 350 men of the 61st and 64th New York saw a weak point in the line and seized a knoll commanding the sunken road. This allowed them to get enfilade fire into the Confederate line, turning it into a deadly trap. In attempting to wheel around to meet this threat, a command from Rodes was misunderstood by Lt. Col. James N. Lightfoot, who had succeeded the unconscious John Gordon. Lightfoot ordered his men to about-face and march away, an order that all five regiments of the brigade thought applied to them as well. Confederate troops streamed toward Sharpsburg, their line lost.
Richardson's men were in hot pursuit when massed artillery hastily assembled by Gen. Longstreet drove them back. A counterattack with 200 men led by D.H. Hill got around the Federal left flank near the sunken road, and although they were driven back by a fierce charge of the 5th New Hampshire, this stemmed the collapse of the center. Reluctantly, Richardson ordered his division to fall back to north of the ridge facing the sunken road. His division lost about 1,000 men. Col. Barlow was severely wounded, and Richardson mortally wounded. Winfield S. Hancock assumed division command. Although Hancock would have an excellent future reputation as an aggressive division and corps commander, the unexpected change of command sapped the momentum of the Federal advance.
The carnage from 9:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on the sunken road gave it the name "Bloody Lane", leaving about 5,600 casualties (Union 3,000, Confederate 2,600) along the road. And yet a great opportunity presented itself. If this broken sector of the Confederate line were exploited, Lee's army would have been divided in half and possibly defeated. There were ample forces available to do so. There was a reserve of 3,500 cavalry and the 10,300 infantrymen of Gen. Porter's V Corps, waiting near the middle bridge, a mile away. The VI Corps had just arrived with 12,000 men. Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin of the VI Corps was ready to exploit this breakthrough, but Sumner, the senior corps commander, ordered him not to advance. Franklin appealed to McClellan, who left his headquarters in the rear to hear both arguments but backed Sumner's decision, ordering Franklin and Hancock to hold their positions.
Later in the day, the commander of the other reserve unit near the center, the V Corps, Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter, heard recommendations from Maj. Gen. George Sykes, commanding his 2nd Division, that another attack be made in the center, an idea that intrigued McClellan. However, Porter is said to have told McClellan, "Remember, General, I command the last reserve of the last Army of the Republic." McClellan demurred and another opportunity was lost.
Afternoon phase.
"Location": Sounthern end of the battlefield
The ""Burnside's Bridge"".
The action moved to the southern end of the battlefield. McClellan's plan called for Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside and the IX Corps to conduct a diversionary attack in support of Hooker's I Corps, hoping to draw Confederate attention away from the intended main attack in the north. However, Burnside was instructed to wait for explicit orders before launching his attack, and those orders did not reach him until 10 a.m. Burnside was strangely passive during preparations for the battle. He was disgruntled that McClellan had abandoned the previous arrangement of "wing" commanders reporting to him. Previously, Burnside had commanded a wing that included both the I and IX Corps and now he was responsible only for the IX Corps. Implicitly refusing to give up his higher authority, Burnside treated first Maj. Gen. Jesse L. Reno (killed at South Mountain) and then Brig. Gen. Jacob D. Cox of the Kanawha Division as the corps commander, funneling orders to the corps through him.
Burnside had four divisions (12,500 troops) and 50 guns east of Antietam Creek. Facing him was a force that had been greatly depleted by Lee's movement of units to bolster the Confederate left flank. At dawn, the divisions of Brig. Gens. David R. Jones and John G. Walker stood in defense, but by 10 a.m. all of Walker's men and Col. George T. Anderson's Georgia brigade had been removed. Jones had only about 3,000 men and 12 guns available to meet Burnside. Four thin brigades guarded the ridges near Sharpsburg, primarily a low plateau known as Cemetery Hill. The remaining 400 men—the 2nd and 20th Georgia regiments, under the command of Brig. Gen. Robert Toombs, with two artillery batteries—defended Rohrbach's Bridge, a three-span, 125-foot (38 m) stone structure that was the southernmost crossing of the Antietam. It would become known to history as "Burnside's Bridge" because of the notoriety of the coming battle. The bridge was a difficult objective. The road leading to it ran parallel to the creek and was exposed to enemy fire. The bridge was dominated by a 100-foot (30 m) high wooded bluff on the west bank, strewn with boulders from an old quarry, making infantry and sharpshooter fire from good covered positions a dangerous impediment to crossing.
Antietam Creek in this sector was seldom more than 50 feet (15 m) wide, and several stretches were only waist deep and out of Confederate range. Burnside has been widely criticized for ignoring this fact, starting with derision from Confederate staff officer Henry Kyd Douglas. However, the commanding terrain across the sometimes shallow creek made crossing the water a comparatively easy part of a difficult problem. Burnside concentrated his plan instead on storming the bridge while simultaneously crossing a ford McClellan's engineers had identified a half mile (1 km) downstream, but when Burnside's men reached it, they found the banks too high to negotiate. While Col. George Crook's Ohio brigade prepared to attack the bridge with the support of Brig. Gen. Samuel Sturgis's division, the rest of the Kanawha Division and Brig. Gen. Isaac Rodman's division struggled through thick brush trying to locate Snavely's Ford, 2 miles (3 km) downstream, intending to flank the Confederates.
Crook's assault on the bridge was led by skirmishers from the 11th Connecticut, who were ordered to clear the bridge for the Ohioans to cross and assault the bluff. After receiving punishing fire for 15 minutes, the Connecticut men withdrew with 139 casualties, one-third of their strength, including their commander, Col. Henry W. Kingsbury, who was fatally wounded. Crook's main assault went awry when his unfamiliarity with the terrain caused his men to reach the creek a quarter mile (400 m) upstream from the bridge, where they exchanged volleys with Confederate skirmishers for the next few hours.
While Rodman's division was out of touch, slogging toward Snavely's Ford, Burnside and Cox directed a second assault at the bridge by one of Sturgis's brigades, led by the 2nd Maryland and 6th New Hampshire. They also fell prey to the Confederate sharpshooters and artillery, and their attack fell apart. By this time it was noon, and McClellan was losing patience. He sent a succession of couriers to motivate Burnside to move forward. He ordered one aide, "Tell him if it costs 10,000 men he must go now." He increased the pressure by sending his inspector general, Col. Delos B. Sackett, to confront Burnside, who reacted indignantly: "McClellan appears to think I am not trying my best to carry this bridge; you are the third or fourth one who has been to me this morning with similar orders."
The third attempt to take the bridge was at 12:30 p.m. by Sturgis's other brigade, commanded by Brig. Gen. Edward Ferrero. It was led by the 51st New York and the 51st Pennsylvania, who, with adequate artillery support and a promise that a recently canceled whiskey ration would be restored if they were successful, charged downhill and took up positions on the east bank. Maneuvering a captured light howitzer into position, they fired double canister down the bridge and got within of the enemy. By 1 p.m., Confederate ammunition was running low, and word reached Toombs that Rodman's men were crossing Snavely's Ford on their flank. He ordered a withdrawal. His Georgians had cost the Federals more than 500 casualties, giving up fewer than 160 themselves. And they had stalled Burnside's assault on the southern flank for more than three hours.
Burnside's assault stalled again on its own. His officers had neglected to transport ammunition across the bridge, which was itself becoming a bottleneck for soldiers, artillery, and wagons. This represented another two-hour delay. Gen. Lee used this time to bolster his right flank. He ordered up every available artillery unit, although he made no attempt to strengthen D.R. Jones's badly outnumbered force with infantry units from the left. Instead, he counted on the arrival of A.P. Hill's Light Division, currently embarked on an exhausting 17 mile (27 km) march from Harpers Ferry. By 2 p.m., Hill's men had reached Boteler's Ford, and Hill was able to confer with the relieved Lee at 2:30, who ordered him to bring up his men to the right of Jones.
The Federals were completely unaware that 3,000 new men would be facing them. Burnside's plan was to move around the weakened Confederate right flank, converge on Sharpsburg, and cut Lee's army off from Boteler's Ford, their only escape route across the Potomac. At 3 p.m., Burnside left Sturgis's division in reserve on the west bank and moved west with over 8,000 troops (most of them fresh) and 22 guns for close support.
An initial assault led by the 79th New York "Cameron Highlanders" succeeded against Jones's outnumbered division, which was pushed back past Cemetery Hill and to within of Sharpsburg. Farther to the left, Rodman's division advanced toward Harpers Ferry Road. Its lead brigade, under Col. Harrison Fairchild, containing several colorful Zouaves of the 9th New York, commanded by Col. Rush Hawkins, came under heavy shellfire from a dozen enemy guns mounted on a ridge to their front, but they kept pushing forward. There was panic in the streets of Sharpsburg, clogged with retreating Confederates. Of the five brigades in Jones's division, only Toombs's brigade was still intact, but he had only 700 men.
A. P. Hill's division arrived at 3:30 p.m. Hill divided his column, with two brigades moving southeast to guard his flank and the other three, about 2,000 men, moving to the right of Toombs's brigade and preparing for a counterattack. At 3:40 p.m., Brig. Gen. Maxcy Gregg's brigade of South Carolinians attacked the 16th Connecticut on Rodman's left flank in the cornfield of farmer John Otto. The Connecticut men had been in service for only three weeks, and their line disintegrated with 185 casualties. The 4th Rhode Island came up on the right, but they had poor visibility amid the high stalks of corn, and they were disoriented because many of the Confederates were wearing Union uniforms captured at Harpers Ferry. They also broke and ran, leaving the 8th Connecticut far out in advance and isolated. They were enveloped and driven down the hills toward Antietam Creek. A counterattack by regiments from the Kanawha Division fell short.
The IX Corps had suffered casualties of about 20% but still possessed twice the number of Confederates confronting them. Unnerved by the collapse of his flank, Burnside ordered his men all the way back to the west bank of the Antietam, where he urgently requested more men and guns. McClellan was able to provide just one battery. He said, "I can do nothing more. I have no infantry." In fact, however, McClellan had two fresh corps in reserve, Porter's V and Franklin's VI, but he was too cautious, concerned he was greatly outnumbered and that a massive counterstrike by Lee was imminent. Burnside's men spent the rest of the day guarding the bridge they had suffered so much to capture.
Aftermath.
Casualties.
The bloodiest day in American military history.
The battle was over by 5:30 p.m. Losses for the day were heavy on both sides. The Union had 12,401 casualties with 2,108 dead. Confederate casualties were 10,318 with 1,546 dead. This represented 25% of the Federal force and 31% of the Confederate. Of the other casualties, 1,910 Union and 1,550 Confederate troops died of their wounds soon after the battle, while 225 Union and 306 Confederate troops listed as missing were later confirmed as dead. The fighting on September 17, 1862, therefore killed 7,650 American soldiers. More Americans died in battle on September 17, 1862, than on any other day in the nation's military history. Several generals died as a result of the battle, including Maj. Gens. Joseph K. Mansfield and Israel B. Richardson and Brig. Gen. Isaac P. Rodman on the Union side (all mortally wounded), and Brig. Gens. Lawrence O. Branch and William E. Starke on the Confederate side (killed). Confederate Brig. Gen. George B. Anderson was shot in the ankle during the defense of the Bloody Lane. He survived the battle but died later in October after an amputation.
Lee's retreat and Lincoln-McClellan skirmishs.
On the morning of September 18, Lee's army prepared to defend against a Federal assault that never came. After an improvised truce for both sides to recover and exchange their wounded, Lee's forces began withdrawing across the Potomac that evening to return to Virginia.
President Lincoln was disappointed in McClellan's performance. He believed that McClellan's cautious and poorly coordinated actions in the field had forced the battle to a draw rather than a crippling Confederate defeat. Historian Stephen Sears agrees.
Lincoln relieves McClellan of his command.
The president was even more astonished that from September 17 to October 26, despite repeated entreaties from the War Department and the president himself, McClellan declined to pursue Lee across the Potomac, citing shortages of equipment and the fear of overextending his forces. General-in-Chief Henry W. Halleck wrote in his official report, "The long inactivity of so large an army in the face of a defeated foe, and during the most favorable season for rapid movements and a vigorous campaign, was a matter of great disappointment and regret." Lincoln relieved McClellan of his command of the Army of the Potomac on November 7, effectively ending the general's military career.
Union victory?
Turning point of the American Civil War.
Some students of history question the designation of "strategic victory" for the Union. After all, it can be argued that McClellan performed poorly in the campaign and the battle itself, and Lee displayed great generalship in holding his own in battle against an army that greatly outnumbered his. Casualties were comparable on both sides, although Lee lost a higher percentage of his army. Lee withdrew from the battlefield first, the technical definition of the tactical loser in a Civil War battle. However, in a strategic sense, despite being a tactical draw, Antietam is considered a turning point of the war and a victory for the Union because it ended Lee's strategic campaign (his first invasion of Union territory). American historian James M. McPherson summed up the importance of the Battle of Antietam in his book, "Crossroads of Freedom":
Union victory and its political consequences.
The Emancipation Proclamation.
The results of Antietam also allowed President Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation on September 22, which took effect on January 1, 1863. Although Lincoln had intended to do so earlier, he was advised by his Cabinet to make this announcement after a Union victory to avoid the perception that it was issued out of desperation (since the Confederates had the upper edge in the war prior to Antietam).
United States foreign relations.
The Union victory and Lincoln's proclamation played a considerable role in dissuading the governments of France and the United Kingdom from recognizing the Confederacy; some suspected they were planning to do so in the aftermath of another Union defeat. When the issue of emancipation was linked to the progress of the war, neither government had the political will to oppose the United States, since it linked support to the Confederacy to support for slavery. Both countries had already abolished slavery, and the public would not have tolerated the government militarily supporting a sovereignty upholding the ideals of slavery.
Battlefield preservation.
The battle is commemorated at Antietam National Battlefield. Conservation work undertaken by Antietam National Battlefield and private groups, has earned Antietam a reputation as one of the nation's best preserved Civil War battlefields. Few visual intrusions mar the landscape, letting visitors experience the site nearly as it was in 1862.
Antietam was one of the first five Civil War battlefields preserved federally, receiving that distinction on August 30, 1890. The U.S. War Department also placed over 300 tablets at that time to mark the spots of individual regiments and of significant phases in the battle. The battlefield was transferred to the Department of the Interior in 1933. The Antietam National Battlefield now consists of 2,743 acres, while the Civil War Trust has preserved 240 acres around the site.
Historic photographs and paintings.
Mathew Brady's gallery, "The Dead of Antietam" (1862).
In October 2012, the National Museum of Civil War Medicine displayed 21 original Mathew Brady 1862 photographs documenting the Battle of Antietam. Brady is considered the father of photojournalism. He is known for his efforts to document the Civil War on a grand scale by bringing his photographic studio to the battlefields after receiving special permission from Lincoln in 1861. On September 19, 1862, two days after the Battle of Antietam, Mathew Brady sent photographer Alexander Gardner and his assistant James Gibson to photograph the carnage. In October 1862 Brady displayed the photos by Gardner in an exhibition entitled "The Dead of Antietam" at Brady's New York gallery. Many images in this presentation were graphic photographs of corpses, a presentation new to America. This was the first time that many Americans saw the realities of war in photographs as distinct from previous "artists' impressions". The New York Times published a review on October 20, 1862, describing how, "Of all objects of horror one would think the battle-field should stand preeminent, that it should bear away the palm of repulsiveness." But crowds came to the gallery drawn by a "terrible fascination" to the images of mangled corpses which brought the reality of remote battle fields to New Yorkers. Viewers examined details using a magnifying glass. "We would scarce choose to be in the gallery, when one of the women bending over them should recognize a husband, a son, or a brother in the still, lifeless lines of bodies, that lie ready for the gaping trenches."
Captain James Hope murals.
Captain James Hope of the 2nd Vermont Infantry, a professional artist, painted five large murals based on battlefield scenes he had sketched during the Battle of Antietam. He had been assigned to sideline duties as a scout and mapmaker due to his injuries. The canvasses were exhibited in his gallery in Watkins Glen, New York, until his death in 1892. He had prints made of these larger paintings and sold the reproductions. In the 1930s his work was damaged in a flood. The original murals were shown in a church for many years. In 1979, the National Park Service purchased and restored them. They were featured in a 1984 Time-Life book entitled "The Bloodiest Day: The Battle of Antietam".
Gallery.
The images below include photographs by Alexander Gardner who was employed by Mathew Brady and whose photographs were exhibited in Brady's New York gallery in October 1862, and the murals by Captain James Hope restored by the National Park Service.
In popular culture.
The Battle of Antietam was depicted (at the beginning) in the film "Glory" (1989), directed by Edward Zwick and starring Matthew Broderick, Denzel Washington, Cary Elwes, and Morgan Freeman.
In "Hell on Wheels" season 1, episode 8 ("Derailed"), the former Union Army lieutenant carries a Confederate saber that he took as a trophy at Antietam, which he termed a "glorious victory". Cullen Bohannon, a former Confederate soldier, disagrees with the blue coat's assessment of what Bohannon calls the Battle of Sharpsburg. The lieutenant, who was with the 51st from Pennsylvania, which stormed the Burnside Bridge, thought they had the Confederate soldiers running scared. Bohannon corrects him, explaining that the Confederate forces retreated from Burnside Bridge because they ran out of ammunition shooting Union Army soldiers, who kept lining up as if at a firing squad, to be shot like "fish in a bloody barrel". The men's animosity and opposing views of that skirmish reflect their differing philosophies and bode badly for the outcome of their shared mission in this episode.

</doc>
<doc id="84856" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84856" title="Charlestown">
Charlestown

Charlestown or Charles Town may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84863" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84863" title="John Watson">
John Watson

John Watson or Johnny Watson is the name of:

</doc>
<doc id="84864" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84864" title="Edward Thorndike">
Edward Thorndike

Edward Lee "Ted" Thorndike (August 31, 1874 – August 9, 1949) was an American psychologist who spent nearly his entire career at Teachers College, Columbia University. His work on Comparative psychology and the learning process led to the theory of connectionism and helped lay the scientific foundation for modern educational psychology. He also worked on solving industrial problems, such as employee exams and testing. He was a member of the board of the Psychological Corporation and served as president of the American Psychological Association in 1912. A "Review of General Psychology" survey, published in 2002, ranked Thorndike as the ninth most cited psychologist of the 20th century. Edward Thorndike had a powerful impact on reinforcement theory and behavior analysis, providing the basic framework for empirical laws in behavior psychology with his Law of Effect. Through his contributions to the behavioral psychology field came his major impacts on education, where the Law of Effect has great influence in the classroom.
Early life.
Thorndike, born in Williamsburg, Massachusetts, was the son of a Methodist minister in Lowell, Massachusetts. Thorndike graduated from The Roxbury Latin School (1891), in West Roxbury, Massachusetts and from Wesleyan University (B.S. 1895). He earned an M.A. at Harvard University in 1897. His two brothers also became important scholars. The younger, Lynn, was a medievalist specializing in the history of science and magic, while the older, Ashley, was an English professor and noted authority on Shakespeare.
While at Harvard, he was interested in how animals learn (ethology), and worked with William James. Afterwards, he became interested in the animal 'man', to the study of which he then devoted his life. Edward's thesis is sometimes thought of as the essential document of modern comparative psychology. Upon graduation, Thorndike returned to his initial interest, educational psychology. In 1898 he completed his PhD at Columbia University under the supervision of James McKeen Cattell, one of the founding fathers of psychometrics.
In 1899, after a year of unhappy initial employment at the College for Women of Case Western Reserve in Cleveland, Ohio, he became an instructor in psychology at Teachers College at Columbia University, where he remained for the rest of his career, studying human learning, education, and mental testing. In 1937 Thorndike became the second President of the Psychometric Society, following in the footsteps of Louis Leon Thurstone who had established the society and its journal "Psychometrika" the previous year.
On August 29, 1900, he wed Elizabeth Moulton and they had four children.
During the early stages of his career, he purchased a wide tract of land on the Hudson and encouraged other researchers to settle around him. Soon a colony had formed there with him as its 'tribal' chief.
Connectionism.
Thorndike was a pioneer not only in behaviorism and in studying learning, but also in using animals in psychology experiments. Thorndike was able to create a theory of learning based on his research with animals. His doctoral dissertation, "Animal Intelligence: An Experimental Study of the Associative Processes in Animals", was the first in psychology where the subjects were nonhumans. Thorndike was interested in whether animals could learn tasks through imitation or observation. To test this, Thorndike created puzzle boxes.
The puzzle boxes were approximately 20 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches tall. Each box had a door that was pulled open by a weight attached to a string that ran over a pulley and was attached to the door. The string attached to the door led to a lever or button inside the box. When the animal pressed the bar or pulled the lever, the string attached to the door would cause the weight to lift and the door to open. Thorndike’s puzzle boxes were arranged so that the animal would be required to perform a certain response (pulling a lever or pushing a button), while he measured the amount of time it took them to escape. Once the animal had performed the desired response they were allowed to escape and were also given a reward, usually food. Thorndike primarily used cats in his puzzle boxes. When the cats were put into the cages they would wander restlessly and meow, but they did not know how to escape. Eventually, the cats would step on the switch on the floor by chance, and the door would open. To see if the cats could learn through observation, he had them observe other animals escaping from the box. He would then compare the times of those who got to observe others escaping with those who did not, and he found that there was no difference in their rate of learning. Thorndike saw the same results with other animals, and he observed that there was no improvement even when he placed the animals’ paws on the correct levers, buttons, or bar. These failures led him to fall back on a trial and error explanation of learning. He found that after accidentally stepping on the switch once, they would press the switch faster in each succeeding trial inside the puzzle box. By observing and recording the animals’ escapes and escape times, Thorndike was able to graph the times it took for the animals in each trial to escape, resulting in a learning curve. The animals had difficulty escaping at first, but eventually "caught on" and escaped faster and faster with each successive puzzle box trial, until they eventually leveled off. The quickened rate of escape results in the s-shape of the learning curve. The learning curve also suggested that different species learned in the same way but at different speeds. From his research with puzzle boxes, Thorndike was able to create his own theory of learning.
The puzzle box experiments were motivated in part by Thorndike's dislike for statements that animals made use of extraordinary faculties such as insight in their problem solving: "In the first place, most of the books do not give us a psychology, but rather a eulogy of animals. They have all been about animal intelligence, never about animal stupidity."
Thorndike meant to distinguish clearly whether or not cats escaping from puzzle boxes were using insight. Thorndike's instruments in answering this question were learning curves revealed by plotting the time it took for an animal to escape the box each time it was in the box. He reasoned that if the animals were showing insight, then their time to escape would suddenly drop to a negligible period, which would also be shown in the learning curve as an abrupt drop; while animals using a more ordinary method of trial and error would show gradual curves. His finding was that cats consistently showed gradual learning.
Adult learning.
Thorndike put his testing expertise to work for the United States Army during World War I. He created both the Alpha and Beta versions that led to today's ASVAB, a multiple choice test administered by the United States Military Entrance Processing Command that is used to determine qualification for enlistment in the United States armed forces. For classification purposes, soldiers were administered Alpha tests. With the realization that some soldiers could not read well enough to complete the Alpha test, the Beta test (consisting of pictures and diagrams) was administered. Such contributions anchored the field of psychology and encouraged later development of educational psychology.
Thorndike believed that "Instruction should pursue specified, socially useful goals." Thorndike believed that the ability to learn did not decline until age 35, and only then at a rate of 1 percent per year, going against the thoughts of the time that "you can't teach old dogs new tricks." It was later shown that the speed of learning, not the power of learning declined with age. Thorndike also stated the law of effect, which says behaviors that are followed by good consequences are likely to be repeated in the future.
Thorndike identified the three main areas of intellectual development. The first being abstract intelligence. This is the ability to process and understand different concepts. The second is mechanical intelligence, which is the ability to handle physical objects. Lastly there is social intelligence. This is the ability to handle human interaction
Development of law of effect.
Thorndike's research focused on instrumental learning, which means that learning is developed from the organism doing something. For example, he placed a cat inside a wooden box. The cat would use various methods while trying to get out, however nothing would work until it hit the lever. Afterwards, Thorndike tried placing the cat inside the wooden box again. This time, the cat was able to hit the lever quickly and succeeded in getting out from the box.
At first, Thorndike emphasized the importance of dissatisfaction stemming from failure as equal to the reward of satisfaction with success, though in his experiments and trials on humans he came to conclude that reward is a much more effective motivator than punishment. He also emphasized that the satisfaction must come immediately after the success, or the lesson would not sink in.
Eugenic views.
Thorndike was a proponent of eugenics. He argued that "selective breeding can alter man's capacity to learn, to keep sane, to cherish justice or to be happy. There is no more certain and economical a way to improve man's environment as to improve his nature."
Criticism.
Thorndike's law of effect and puzzle box methodology were subjected to detailed criticism by behaviorists and many other psychologists. The criticisms over the law of effect mostly cover four aspects of the theory: the implied or retroactive working of the effect, the philosophical implication of the law, the identification of the effective conditions that cause learning, and the comprehensive usefulness of the law.
Thorndike on education.
Thorndike's Educational psychology began a trend toward behavioral psychology that sought to use empirical evidence and a scientific approach to problem solving. Thorndike was among some of the first psychologists to combine learning theory, psychometrics, and applied research for school-related subjects to form psychology of education. One of his influences on education is seen by his ideas on mass marketing of tests and textbooks at that time. Thorndike's opposition to the idea that learning should reflect nature, was the main thought of developmental scientists at that time. He instead thought that schooling should improve upon nature. Unlike many other psychologist of his time, Thorndike took a statistical approach to education in his later years, by collecting qualitative information intended to help teachers and educators deal with practical educational problems. Thorndike's theory was an association theory, as many were in that time. He believed that the association between stimulus and response was solidified by a reward or confirmation. He also thought that motivation was an important factor in learning. The Law of Effect introduced the relation between reinforcers and punishers. Although Thorndike's description of the relation between reinforcers and punishers was incomplete, his work in this area would later become a catalyst in further research, such as that of B.F. Skinner.
Thorndike's Law of Effect states that "responses that produce a desired effect are more likely to occur again whereas responses that produce an unpleasant effect are less likely to occur again". The terms 'desired effect' and 'unpleasant effect' eventually became known as 'reinforcers' and 'punishers'. Thorndike's contributions to the Behavioral Psychology Society are seen through his influences in the classroom, with a particular focus on praising and ignoring behaviors. Praise is used in the classroom to encourage and support the occurrence of a desired behavior. When used in the classroom, praise has been shown to increase correct responses and appropriate behavior. Planned ignoring is used to decrease, weaken, or eliminate the occurrence of a target behavior. Planned ignoring is accomplished by removing the reinforcer that is maintaining the behavior. For example, when the teacher does not pay attention to a "whining" behavior of a student, it allows the student to realize that whining will not succeed in gaining the attention of the teacher.
Beliefs about the behavior of women.
Unlike later behaviorists such as John Watson, who placed a very strong emphasis on the impact of environmental influences on behavior, Thorndike believed that differences in the parental behavior of men and women were due to biological, rather than cultural, reasons. While conceding that society could "complicate or deform" what he believed were inborn differences, he believed that "if we should keep the environment of boys and girls absolutely similar these instincts would produce sure and important differences between the mental and moral activities of boys and girls". Indeed, Watson himself overtly critiqued the idea of maternal instincts in humans in a report of his observations of first-time mothers struggling to breastfeed. Watson argued that the very behaviors Thorndike referred to as resulting from a "nursing instinct" stemming from "unreasoning tendencies to pet, coddle, and 'do for' others,", were performed with difficulty by new mothers and thus must have been learned, while "instinctive factors are practically nil". Thorndike's beliefs about inborn differences between the thoughts and behavior of men and women included misogynist, pseudo-scientific arguments about the role of women in society. For example, along with the "nursing instinct," Thorndike talked about the instinct of "submission to mastery," writing: "Women in general are thus by original nature submissive to men in general.". That this statement was little more than his opinion, and lacked any substantiating scientific evidence, appeared to be overlooked as it validated prevailing cultural values concerning gender and neatly justified prejudice against women in academia (including entrance into doctoral programs, psychological laboratories, and scientific societies).
Thorndike's word books.
Thorndike composed three different word books to assist teachers with word and reading instruction. After publication of the first book in the series, "The Teacher's Word Book" (1921), two other books were written and published, each approximately a decade apart from its predecessor. The second book in the series, its full title being "A Teacher's Word Book of the Twenty Thousand Words Found Most Frequently and Widely in General Reading for Children and Young People", was published in 1932, and the third and final book, "The Teacher's Word Book of 30,000 Words", was published in 1944.
In the preface to the third book, Thorndike writes that the list contained therein "tells anyone who wishes to know whether to use a word in writing, speaking, or teaching how common the word is in standard English reading matter" (p. x), and he further advises that the list can best be employed by teachers if they allow it to guide the decisions they make choosing which words to emphasize during reading instruction. Some words require more emphasis than others, and, according to Thorndike, his list informs teachers of the most frequently occurring words that should be reinforced by instruction and thus become "a permanent part of [students’] stock of word knowledge" (p. xi). If a word is not on the list but appears in an educational text, its meaning only needs to be understood temporarily in the context in which it was found, and then summarily discarded from memory.
In Appendix A to the second book, Thorndike gives credit to his word counts and how frequencies were assigned to particular words. Selected sources extrapolated from Appendix A include:
Thorndike also examined local newspapers and correspondence for common words to be included in the book.
Thorndike's influence.
Thorndike contributed a great deal to psychology. His influence on animal psychologists, especially those who focused on behavior plasticity, greatly contributed to the future of that field. In addition to helping pave the way towards behaviorism, his contribution to measurement influenced philosophy, the administration and practice of education, military administration, industrial personnel administration, civil service and many public and private social services. Thorndike influenced many schools of psychology as Gestalt psychologists, psychologists studying the conditioned reflex, and behavioral psychologists all studied Thorndike’s research as a starting point. Thorndike was a contemporary of John B. Watson and Ivan Pavlov. However, unlike Watson, Thorndike introduced the concept of reinforcement. Thorndike was the first to apply psychological principles to the area of learning. His research led to many theories and laws of learning. His theory of learning, especially the law of effect, is most often considered to be his greatest achievement. In 1929, Thorndike addressed his early theory of learning, and claimed that he had been wrong. After further research, he was forced to denounce his law of exercise completely, because he found that practice alone did not strengthen an association, and that time alone did not weaken an association. He also got rid of half of the law of effect, after finding that a satisfying state of affairs strengthens an association, but punishment is not effective in modifying behavior. He placed a great emphasis on consequences of behavior as setting the foundation for what is and is not learned. His work represents the transition from the school of functionalism to behaviorism, and enabled psychology to focus on learning theory. Thorndike’s work would eventually be a major influence to B.F. Skinner and Clark Hull. Skinner, like Thorndike, put animals in boxes and observed them to see what they were able to learn.
The learning theories of Thorndike and Pavlov were later synthesized by Clark Hull. His work on motivation and attitude formation directly affected studies on human nature as well as social order. Thorndike’s research drove comparative psychology for fifty years, and influenced countless psychologists over that period of time, and even still today.
Accomplishments.
In 1912, Thorndike was elected president for the American Psychological Association. He was admitted to the National Academy of Sciences in 1917. He was one of the very first psychologists to be admitted to the association. Thorndike is well known for his experiments on animals supporting the law of effect. In 1934, Thorndike was elected president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
References.
Woodworth, R. S. (1950). "Edward Thorndike 1874-1949". Science, New Series. 111(2880): 251. http://www.jstor.org.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/stable/1676976

</doc>
<doc id="84869" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84869" title="Salacia">
Salacia

Salacia may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84870" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84870" title="Shia (disambiguation)">
Shia (disambiguation)

Shia refers to the second largest denomination of Islam.
Shia or Shias may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84871" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84871" title="Vejovis">
Vejovis

Vejovis or Vejove () was a Roman god. Romans believed that Vejovis was one of the first Gods in this world.
Representation and worship.
Vejovis was portrayed as a young man, holding a bunch of arrows, pilum, (or lightning bolts) in his hand, and accompanied by a goat. Romans believed that Vejovis was one of the first gods to be born. He was a god of healing, and became associated with the Greek Asclepius. He was mostly worshipped in Rome and Bovillae in Latium. On the Capitoline Hill and on the Tiber Island, temples were erected in his honour.
Sacrifices.
In spring, multiple goats were sacrificed to him to avert plagues. Aulus Gellius informs us that Vejovis received the sacrifice of a female goat, sacrificed "ritu humano"; this obscure phrase could either mean "after the manner of a human sacrifice" or "in the manner of a burial."
The God of Medicine (officially).
The studies about Vejovis are very poor and unclear. They show a constant updating of his condition and his use by people: escaping from the netherworld, a volcanic god responsible for marshland and earthquakes, and later guardian angel in charge of slaves and fighters refusing to lose. God of deceivers, he was called to protect right causes and to give pain and deception to enemies. His temple was described as a safe haven for wrongly persecuted people, and dedicated to the protection of newcomers to Rome. Some have disputed this.
He is also at times identified with Apollo.
Aulus Gellius, in the "Noctes Atticae", written almost a millennia after; speculated that Vejovis was the inverse or ill-omened counterpart of Jupiter; compare Summanus. Aulus Gellius observes that the particle "ve-" that prefixes the name of the god also appears in Latin words such as "vesanus", "insane," and thus interprets the name Vejovis as the anti-Jove. 
He has been identified with Apollo, with the infant Jupiter, and speculatively as the Anti-Jupiter (i.e. the Jupiter of the Lower World) as suggested by his name. In art, he was depicted as a youth holding a Laurel wreath and some arrows, next to a goat. He had a temple between the two peaks of the Capitoline Hill in Rome, where his statue had a beardless head and carried a bundle of arrows in his right hand. It stood next to a statue of a goat. There is no firm evidence that he was a god of expiation and the protector of runaway justice-seekers.
Festivals.
Vejovis had three festivals in the Roman Calendar: on January, 7 March, and 21 May.

</doc>
<doc id="84872" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84872" title="Nona">
Nona

Nona may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84873" title="Decima">
Decima

Decima can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84874" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84874" title="Morta">
Morta

Morta (died c. 1263) was wife of Mindaugas, the first known ruler of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. She was the Grand Duchess of Lithuania (until 1253) and later Queen consort of Lithuania (1253–1262). Very little is known about her life. Probably, Morta was Mindaugas' second wife as Vaišvilkas, the eldest son of Mindaugas, was already a mature man active in international politics when Morta's sons were still young and dependent on the parents. After her death, Mindaugas married her sister, the wife of Daumantas. In revenge, Daumantas allied with Treniota and assassinated Mindaugas and two of Morta's sons in 1263.
Origin.
Her pagan name is unknown. The only clue into her origin or birthplace is a short mention in the comments following the treaty signed in 1219 between the Lithuanian dukes and Galicia–Volhynia. It says that Mindaugas killed many members of the Bulaičiai family, including Vismantas whose wife Mindaugas took for himself. The Hypatian Codex elaborates that Vismantas was killed in 1251–1253 during an attack against Vykintas' castle (often assumed to be in Tverai). It is generally assumed that Morta was Vismantas' wife. Lithuanian historian Edvardas Gudavičius analyzed toponyms and determined that the Bulaičiai family most likely hailed from the Šiauliai region. Based on this extrapolation, residents of Šiauliai call the city home of Morta.
Life.
Her life is briefly described in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle. The Chronicle paints an image of a capable woman who advised her husband in political affairs and even provides several colorful dialogues between her and Mindaugas. According to the Chronicle, she supported Lithuanian conversion to Christianity, opposed Treniota, and defended the Christians when Mindaugas relapsed to his pagan faith. Taking into account her support to the Christians and the fact that her pagan name is unknown, Rimvydas Petrauskas proposed that perhaps Morta was baptized earlier than Mindaugas (he was baptized c. 1252 by the Bishop of Chełmno).
Family.
The written sources contain little information on Morta's family and it is not entirely clear how many children she had. Two sons, Replys and Gerstukas, are mentioned once in an act dated August 7, 1261. The act, by which Mindaugas granted all of Selonia to the Livonian Order, could be a medieval forgery by the Order. According to the Hypatian Codex, two sons, Rūklys and Rupeikis, were assassinated together with Mindaugas in 1263. This is the only information available and historians disagree on whether these were the same two sons, whose names were distorted by medieval scribes, or whether there were four sons.

</doc>
<doc id="84878" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84878" title="Robert Donat">
Robert Donat

Friedrich Robert Donat (18 March 19059 June 1958) was an English film and stage actor. He is best remembered for his roles in Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps" (1935) and "Goodbye, Mr. Chips" (1939), the latter for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor.
Donat was also a successful stage actor, despite the challenge of chronic asthma from which he suffered.
Early life and career.
Donat was the fourth and youngest son born in Withington, Manchester, Lancashire, to Ernst Emil Donat (a civil engineer of Polish origin) and his wife Rose Alice (née Green). He was of English, Polish, German and French descent and was educated at Manchester's Central High School for Boys. He took elocution lessons with James Bernard.
Donat made his first stage appearance in 1921, at the age of 16, with Henry Baynton's company at the Prince of Wales Theatre, Birmingham, playing Lucius in "Julius Caesar". His real break came in 1924 when he joined the company of Shakespearean actor Sir Frank Benson, where he stayed for four years. Donat married Ella Annesley Voysey (1903-1994) in 1929; the couple had three children together, but divorced in 1946
Stardom.
"The British cinema's one undisputed romantic leading man in the 1930s was Robert Donat," wrote Jeffrey Richards in his book "The Age of the Dream Palace". "The image he projected was that of the romantic idealist, often with a dash of the gentleman adventurer."
Initially, around 1930 and 1931, he was known as "screen test" Donat in the industry because of his many unsuccessful auditions for film producers. MGM's producer Irving Thalberg spotted him on the London stage in "Precious Bane", and Donat was offered a part in the American studio's "Smilin' Through" (1932). He rejected this offer. Instead, Donat made his film debut in a quota quickie "Men of Tomorrow" (1932) for Alexander Korda's London Films. An abysmal screen test for Korda had ended with Donat's laughter. Reputedly, Korda in response exclaimed: "That's the most natural laugh I have ever heard in my life. What acting! Put him under contract immediately." Donat's first great screen success soon followed in his fourth film. This was as Thomas Culpeper in "The Private Life of Henry VIII" (1933) for the same producer.
Korda loaned him to Edward Small for the only film Donat made in Hollywood, "The Count of Monte Cristo" (1934). He did not care for the film colony and, despite being offered the lead role in "Captain Blood" (1935), returned to Britain to begin work on Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps" (1935) opposite Madeline Carroll. His performance was well-received: "Mr Donat, who has never been very well served in the cinema until now, suddenly blossoms out into a romantic comedian of no mean order", wrote the film critic C. A. Lejeune in "The Observer" at the time of the film's release. Lejeune observed that he possessed "an easy confident humour that has always been regarded as the perquisite of the American male star. For the first time on our screen we have the British equivalent of a Clark Gable or a Ronald Colman, playing in a purely national idiom. Mr Donat, himself, I fancy, is hardly conscious of it, which is all to the good." Hitchcock wanted Donat for the role of the Detective in "Sabotage" (1936), but this time Korda refused to release him.
In 1936 Donat took on the management of the Queen's Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue where he produced "Red Night" by J. L. Hodson. He made two further films under his contract with Korda, "The Ghost Goes West" (1935), and "Knight Without Armour" (1937). Korda became committed to the latter project because of Donat's indecision. Madeleine Carroll had read the James Hilton novel while shooting "The 39 Steps", and had persuaded Donat that it could be a good second film for them to star in together. Donat acquired the rights and passed them on to Korda, although by now Carroll was unavailable. His eventual co-star, Marlene Dietrich, was the source of much attention when she arrived in Britain, in which Donat was involved, and this was enough for him to suffer a nervous collapse a few days into the shooting schedule. Donat entered a nursing home. The production delay caused by Donat's asthma led to talk of replacing him. Dietrich, contracted by Korda for $450,000, threatened to leave the project if this happened, and production was halted for 2 months. At that point, Donat was able to return to work.
In 1938, Donat signed a contract with MGM British for £150,000 with a commitment to making 6 films. In "The Citadel" (1938), he played Andrew Manson, a newly qualified Scottish Doctor, a role for which he received his first Best Actor Oscar nomination.
Donat is best remembered for his role as the school master in "Goodbye, Mr. Chips" (1939). Australian film critic Brian McFarlane writes: "Class-ridden and sentimental perhaps, it remains extraordinarily touching in his Oscar-winning performance, and it ushers in the Donat of the postwar years." His rivals for the Best Actor Award were Clark Gable for "Gone with the Wind", Laurence Olivier for "Wuthering Heights", James Stewart for "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" and Mickey Rooney for "Babes in Arms".
He was a major theatre star. His stage career included performances in Shaw's "The Devil's Disciple" (1938) and Captain Shotover in a new staging of "Heartbreak House" (1942). With "The Cure for Love" (1945) by Walter Greenwood, one of the stage productions he directed, he began his professional association with Renée Asherson, later his second wife. This continued with a production of "Much Ado About Nothing" (1946) with the couple playing Benedict and Beatrice.
Donat lobbied hard for two film roles: he was cast in neither. He wanted to play the Chorus in Olivier's "Henry V", but the role went to Leslie Banks, and he longed desperately to be cast against type as Bill Sikes in David Lean's "Oliver Twist" (1948), but Lean thought him wrong for the part and cast Robert Newton instead. The MGM British contract ended with litigation, and he made only two more films for the company, "The Adventures of Tartu" (1943), with Valerie Hobson, and "Perfect Strangers" (1945) with Deborah Kerr.
Later life and career.
Donat suffered from chronic asthma, which affected his career and limited him to appearing in only twenty films. Donat and Asherson reprised their stage roles in the film version of "The Cure for Love" (1949). His only film as director, its production was affected by his ill health. The film's soundtrack had to be re-recorded after shooting was completed because Donat's asthma had severely affected his voice. Modestly received by a reviewer in the "Monthly Film Bulletin", and described as "pedestrian" by Philip French in 2009, it was a hit in the North. In this film, Donat used his natural Mancunian accent, which his early elocution lessons had attempted to completely suppress. Donat married Asherson, his second wife, in 1953. They later separated, but might have reconciled.
He was cast as Thomas Becket in T.S. Eliot's "Murder in the Cathedral" in Robert Helpmann's production at the Old Vic Theatre in 1952, but although his return to stage was well received, his illness forced him to withdraw during the run. The same reason also caused him to drop out of "Hobson's Choice" (1954). Scheduled to play Willy Mossop, he was replaced by John Mills. Author David Shipman speculates that Donat's asthma may have been psychosomatic: "His tragedy was that the promise of his early years was never fulfilled and that he was haunted by agonies of doubt and disappointment (which probably were the cause of his chronic asthma)." David Thomson also suggested this explanation, and Donat himself thought that his illness had a 90% basis in his psychology. In a 1980 interview with Barry Norman, his first wife Ella Annesley Voysey (by then known as Ella Hall), said that Donat's asthma was a psychosomatic response to the birth of their daughter. According to her: "Robert was full of fear." "Lease of Life" (1954), made by Ealing Studios, was his penultimate film in which Donat plays a Vicar who discovers that he has a terminal illness.
Donat's final role was the mandarin Yang Cheng in "The Inn of the Sixth Happiness" (1958). His last spoken words in this film were prophetic, "We shall not see each other again, I think. Farewell." Several months after his death, Donat was nominated for his first Golden Globe and received a National Board of Review Special Citation for his performance.
Death and legacy.
He died on 9 June 1958 aged 53 in London. His biographer Kenneth Barrow writes on the cause of his death: "Perhaps the asthma had weakened him but, in fact, it was discovered he had a brain tumour the size of a duck egg and cerebral thrombosis was certified as the primary cause of death."
Donat has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for motion pictures at 6420 Hollywood Blvd. A blue plaque commemorates Donat at 8 Meadway in Hampstead Garden Suburb. His place of birth at 42 Everett Road in Withington, Manchester is also commemorated by a similar plaque. The actors Peter Donat and Richard Donat are his nephews.

</doc>
<doc id="84883" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84883" title="Bellona">
Bellona

Bellona may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84887" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84887" title="Mefistofele">
Mefistofele

Mefistofele () is an opera in a prologue, four acts and an epilogue, the only completed opera with music by the Italian composer-librettist Arrigo Boito (there are several completed operas for which he was librettist only). The opera was given its premiere on 5 March 1868 at La Scala, Milan under the baton of the composer, despite his lack of experience and skill as a conductor.
However, it was not a success and was immediately withdrawn after only two performances. Revisions in 1875 resulted in success in Bologna and, with further adjustments in 1876 for Venice, the opera was performed elsewhere.
Composition history.
Boito began consideration of an opera on the Faustian theme after completing his studies at the Milan Conservatory in 1861. "Mefistofele" is one of many pieces of classical music based on the Faust legend and, like many other composers, Boito used Goethe's version as his starting point. He was an admirer of Richard Wagner and, like him, chose to write his own libretto, something which was virtually unheard of in Italian opera up to that time. Much of the text is actually a literal translation from Goethe's German to Boito's Italian.
The most popular earlier work based on the legend was Charles Gounod's opera "Faust", which Boito regarded as a superficial and frivolous treatment of a profound subject. Furthermore, Boito was contemptuous of what he saw as the low operatic standards prevailing in Italy at that time, and he determined to make his new work distinctive, both musically and intellectually, different from anything that had been heard before. He hoped that it would be a wake-up call and an inspiration to other young Italian composers.
The piano-vocal score was completed in 1867 while Boito was visiting relatives in Poland.
Performance history and revisions.
19th century.
As the evening of 5 March 1868 premiere performance progressed, the hostility of the audience, unfamiliar with Boito's avant-garde musical style and unimpressed by many of the scenes (notably the scene in the emperor's court), steadily increased. Furthermore, the work was far too long and the cast inadequate for the complexities of the music. When the curtain finally came down well after midnight, it was clear that the premiere had been a failure. After just two performances, with the second one being divided into two sections and presented on successive evenings, the opera was withdrawn.
Boito immediately set to work revising his opera, greatly reduced its length by about one-third by making many scenes smaller in scale. The most important changes were the following: Boito removed the entire first scene of the original act 4 (scene in the imperial court), symphonic intermezzo "La Battaglia" and expanded act 5 as an epilogue, adding the duet "Lontano, lontano" to Act 3 in the process. Faust was changed from a baritone to a tenor.
The revised version was premiered in Bologna on 4 October 1875, this time sung by what is generally regarded to be a very fine cast, and was an immediate success. This change in reception is thought to be partly due to Boito's revisions making the opera more traditional in style, and also to the Italian audience having become familiar with, and more willing to accept, developments in opera associated with those of Richard Wagner.
Boito made further minor revisions during 1876, and this version was first performed in Venice on 13 May 1876. The first British performance took place at Her Majesty's Theatre, London on 6 July 1880 and the American premiere was on 16 November 1880 in Boston. Thereafter, Boito continued to make small changes until the final definitive production in Milan on 25 May 1881.
20th century and beyond.
In the early 20th century, revivals of the opera were associated particularly with the famous Russian bass Feodor Chaliapin: he sang the title role on the occasion of his first appearance outside Russia (La Scala, Milan, 16 March 1901) and also on his North American debut (Metropolitan Opera, New York, 20 November 1907). Chaliapin made his first appearance at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden on 25 May 1926. Parts of a subsequent performance on 31 May were recorded by His Master's Voice.
In 1969, the New York City Opera presented a new production by Tito Capobianco, with Norman Treigle scoring his greatest success in the title role.
The Metropolitan Opera has given the work a total of 67 times since it first appeared there on 5 December 1883, most recently in February 2000.
The Royal Opera in London has only given one performance of the opera, a concert version in March 1998 at the Barbican Centre, with Samuel Ramey as the title character.
As Mefistofele, Ramey made the role a signature one, appearing in many productions in the 1980s and early 1990s, including one given by the San Francisco Opera in November 1994. San Francisco Opera revived the 1994 production of the opera as the first production of its 2013-2014 season with Ildar Abdrazakov as Mefistofele, Patricia Racette as Margherita and Ramón Vargas as Faust.
The opera was performed as part of the 2013/14 season at the Croatian National Theatre (HNK Split), directed by Michał Znaniecki and conducted by Nikša Bareza.
In 2014 the opera was performed in Kraków as a co-production with Trondheim Symphony Orchestra (TSO Music Theatre); the premiere in Trondheim, Norway took place in June 2015. The production was directed by Tomasz Konina and conducted by Tomasz Tokarczyk.
In August 2014, the opera was performed in the 13th Opera Festival of the Theatro da Paz in Belém, Brazil, after a 50-year hiatus from Brazilian theaters. There Mefistofeles was played by Denis Sedov and Fausto played by Fernando Portari.
Synopsis.
Prologue.
A heavenly chorus praises God the Creator. Mefistofele scornfully declares that he can win the soul of Faust. His challenge is accepted by the Forces of Good.
Act 1.
"Scene 1, Easter Sunday"
The aged Dr. Faust and his pupil Wagner are watching the Easter celebrations in the main square in Frankfurt. Faust senses that they are being followed by a mysterious friar, about whom he senses something evil. Wagner dismisses his master’s feelings of unease and as darkness falls they return to Faust’s home
"Scene 2, The Pact"
Faust is in his study, deep in contemplation. His thoughts are disturbed in dramatic fashion by the sudden appearance of the sinister friar, whom he now recognizes as a manifestation of the Devil (Mefistofele). Far from being terrified, Faust is intrigued and enters into a discussion with Mefistofele culminating in an agreement by which he will give his soul to the devil on his death in return for worldly bliss for the remainder of his life.
Act 2.
"Scene 1, The Garden"
Restored to his youth, Faust has infatuated Margareta, an unsophisticated village girl. She is unable to resist his seductive charms and agrees to drug her mother with a sleeping draught and meet him for a night of passion. Meanwhile Mefistofele amuses himself with Martha, another of the village girls.
"Scene 2, The Witches Sabbath"
Mefistofele has carried Faust away to witness a Witches' Sabbath on the Brocken mountain. The devil mounts his throne and proclaims his contempt for the World and all its worthless inhabitants. As the orgy reaches its climax Faust sees a vision of Margherita, apparently in chains and with her throat cut. Mefistofele reassures him that the vision was a false illusion.
Act 3.
Faust’s vision had been true. Margareta lies in a dismal cell, her mind in a state of confusion and despair. She has been imprisoned for poisoning her mother with the sleeping draught supplied by Faust and for drowning the baby she had borne him. Faust begs Mefistofele to help them escape together. They enter the cell and at first Margareta does not recognize her rescuers. Her joy at being reunited with Faust turns to horror when she sees Mefistofele and recognizes that he is the Devil. Refusing to succumb to further evil, Margareta begs for divine forgiveness. She collapses to the cell floor as the Celestial choir proclaims her redemption.
Act 4.
Mefistofele has now transported Faust back in time to Ancient Greece. Helen of Troy and her followers are enjoying the luxurious and exotic surroundings on the banks of a magnificent river. Faust, attired more splendidly than ever, is easily able to win the heart of the beautiful princess. In a passionate outpouring they declare their undying love and devotion to each other.
Epilogue.
Back in his study Faust, once more an old man, reflects that neither in the world of reality or of illusion was he able to find the perfect experience he craved. He feels that the end of his life is close, but desperate for his final victory, Mefistofele urges him to embark on more exotic adventures. For a moment Faust hesitates, but suddenly seizing his Bible he cries out for God’s forgiveness. Mefistofele has been thwarted; he disappears back into the ground as Faust dies and the Celestial choir once more sings of ultimate redemption.
In popular culture.
"Batman Begins" depicts the opera being performed onstage, using an excerpt of "Rampiamo, rampiamo, che il tempo ci gabba" (Chorus of Warlocks and Witches from Act 2, scene 2) from the 1973 EMI (see "Recordings" above). During the scene, performers dressed as bat-like monsters frighten young Bruce Wayne, who asks to leave.
An avant-garde video directed by Yevhen Tymokhin on a remix with the verse "E' mia madre addormentata" from Margareta's aria in Act 3 was awarded the Euro Video Grand Prix 2006.
References.
Notes
Sources

</doc>
<doc id="84888" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84888" title="Tellus">
Tellus

Tellus is a Latin word meaning "Earth" and may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84890" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84890" title="Bacchus (disambiguation)">
Bacchus (disambiguation)

Bacchus is the Roman name for Dionysus, the god of wine and intoxication.
Bacchus may also refer to:
In art:

</doc>
<doc id="84891" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84891" title="Brownstown, Cambria County, Pennsylvania">
Brownstown, Cambria County, Pennsylvania

Brownstown is a borough in Cambria County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 744 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Johnstown, Pennsylvania Metropolitan Statistical Area and also part of Johnstown's urban area.
Geography.
Brownstown is located in southwestern Cambria County at (40.3336,-78.9371). It is bordered to the south by Westmont. The borough sits on a hill on the west side of the Conemaugh River valley and is northwest of the center of Johnstown by road.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 883 people, 354 households, and 259 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,467.6 people per square mile (1,363.7/km²). There were 372 housing units at an average density of 1,460.9/sq mi (574.5/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 99.32% White, 0.23% African American, 0.11% Asian, and 0.34% from two or more races.
There were 354 households, out of which 31.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.8% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.6% were non-families. 23.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 2.94.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 21.5% under the age of 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 27.5% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 18.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 92.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.8 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $33,043, and the median income for a family was $36,645. Males had a median income of $25,000 versus $17,386 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $13,494. About 5.3% of families and 8.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.3% of those under the age of 18 and 5.2% who were 65 or older.

</doc>
<doc id="84892" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84892" title="Columbia, Pennsylvania">
Columbia, Pennsylvania

Columbia, formerly Wright's Ferry, is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, 28 miles (45 km) southeast of Harrisburg on the left (east) bank of the Susquehanna River, across from Wrightsville and York County and just south of U.S. Route 30. The settlement was founded in 1726 by Colonial English Quakers from Chester County led by entrepreneur and evangelist John Wright. Establishment of the eponymous Wright's Ferry, the first commercial Susquehanna crossing in the region, inflamed territorial conflict with neighboring Maryland but brought growth and prosperity to the small town, which was briefly considered as a candidate for the new United States' capital. Though besieged for a short while by Civil War destruction, Columbia remained a lively center of transport and industry throughout the 19th century, once serving as a terminus of the Pennsylvania Canal. Later, however, the Great Depression and 20th-century changes in economy and technology sent the borough into decline. It is notable today as the site of one of the world's few museums devoted entirely to horology.
History.
18th century.
Early history.
The area around present-day Columbia was originally populated by Native American tribes, most notably the Susquehannocks, who migrated to the area between 1575 and 1600 after separating from the Iroquois Confederacy. They established villages just south of Columbia in what is now Washington Boro, as well as points as far south as Maryland. Captain John Smith estimated their numbers to be about 2,000 in the early 1600s.
First Western settlements.
In 1724, John Wright, an English Quaker, traveled to the Columbia area (then a part of Chester County) to explore the land and proselytize to a Native American tribe, the Shawnee, who had established a settlement along Shawnee Creek. Wright built a log cabin nearby on a tract of land first granted to George Beale by William Penn in 1699, and stayed for more than a year. The area was then known as Shawanatown.
When Wright returned in 1726 with companions Robert Barber and Samuel Blunston, they began developing the area, Wright building a house about a hundred yards from the edge of the Susquehanna River in the area of today's South Second and Union Streets. Susanna Wright later built Wright's Ferry Mansion, the oldest existing house in Columbia, dating 1738. She live in this house with her brother James, and his wife Rhoda, and possibly the first of their many children. The home is open for tours as a house museum and is located at Second and Cherry Streets.
Robert Barber constructed a sawmill in 1727 and later built a home near the river on the Washington Boro Pike, along what is now Route 441. The home still stands, across from the Columbia Wastewater Treatment Plant, and is the second oldest in the borough (after Wright’s Ferry Mansion).
Samuel Blunston constructed a mansion called Bellmont atop the hill next to North Second Street, near Chestnut Street, at the location of the present-day Rotary Park Playground. Upon his death, Blunston willed the mansion to Susanna Wright, who had become a close friend. She lived there, occasionally visiting brother James, ministering to the Native Americans, and raising silkworms for the local silk industry, until her death in 1784 at the age of 87. The residence was demolished in the late 1920s to allow for construction of the Veterans’ Memorial Bridge.
In 1729, after Wright had petitioned William Penn’s son to create a new county, the provincial government took land from Chester County to establish Lancaster County, the fourth county in Pennsylvania. County residents – Indians and colonists alike – regularly traveled to Wright’s home to file papers and claims, seek government assistance and redress of issues, and register land deeds. The area was particularly attractive to Pennsylvania Dutch settlers. During this time, the town was called “Wright’s Ferry.”
Wright's Ferry.
In 1730, John Wright was granted a patent to operate a ferry across the Susquehanna River, subsequently established (with Barber and Blunston) as Wright's Ferry. He also built a ferry house and a two-story log tavern on the eastern shore, north of Locust Street, on Front Street.
The ferry itself originally consisted of two dugout canoes fastened together with carriage and wagon wheels and drawn by cattle. Crossings could be a dangerous enterprise. When several oxen were moved at once, the canoeist guided a lead animal with a rope so that the others would follow; if, however, the lead animal became confused and started swimming in circles, the other animals followed until they tired and eventually drowned.
Typical fares in the 1700s were: 
Fares were reduced in 1787 due to competition from Anderson's Ferry, located further upstream near Marietta. Wright’s Ferry was located immediately south of the present-day Veterans’ Memorial Bridge along Route 462. In later years, Wright rented the ferry to others before finally selling it.
Traffic heading west from Lancaster, Philadelphia, and other nearby towns regularly traveled through Columbia, using the ferry to cross the Susquehanna. As traffic flow increased, the ferry grew, to the point of including canoes, rafts, flatboats, and eventually steamboats; it became capable of handling Conestoga wagons and other large vehicles. Due to the volume of traffic, however, wagons, freight, supplies and people often became backed up, creating a waiting period of several days to cross the river. With 150 to 200 vehicles lined up on the Columbia side, ferrymen used chalk to number the wagons.
Cresap's War.
Wright's Ferry was the first convenient crossing of the Susquehanna River in the region. At the time, however, southern Pennsylvania above the 40th parallel was claimed by the Province of Maryland, which took especial interest in the rural area around the ferry. Fearing an influx of Pennsylvanian settlers that could weaken Maryland's influence, Maryland colonist Thomas Cresap, under the aegis of Lord Baltimore, attempted to establish a competing ferry and a strong landholding presence around the Susquehanna. Pennsylvanians responded in kind; a violent attack on Cresap in October 1730 escalated the situation into a series of bitter (if not bloody) militia skirmishes and heated legal battles. The situation was not fully resolved until a London peace agreement in 1738, which cooled the colonies' territorial dispute and set the stage for the later codification of the Mason–Dixon Line.
Becoming Columbia.
Samuel Wright, son of James and Rhoda Wright, was born on May 12, 1754. He eventually became the town proprietor and created a public grounds company to administer the land. Through his trusteeship, the town’s first water distribution system (later the Columbia Water Company) was established, as well as the Washington Institute (the town’s first school of higher learning) and the Locust Street Park, located at what is now Locust Street and Route 462.
In the spring of 1788, Samuel Wright had the area surveyed and formally laid out the town into 160 building lots, which were distributed by lottery at 15 shillings per ticket. "Adventurers", as purchasers were known, included speculators from many areas of the country. Wright and town citizens renamed the town “Columbia” in honor of Christopher Columbus in the hope of influencing the new U.S. Congress to select it as the nation’s capital, a plan George Washington favored; a formal proposal to do so was made in 1789. Unfortunately for the town, when Congress voted in 1790, the final tally was one vote short. Later, Columbia narrowly missed becoming the capital of Pennsylvania; Harrisburg was chosen instead, being closer to the state’s geographical center.
19th century.
Expansion, construction, and transportation.
English Anglicans, Scots-Irish Presbyterians, freed African slaves, German Lutherans, and descendants of French Huguenots came to outnumber the first Quaker settlers within a generation.
Columbia became an incorporated borough in 1814, formed out of Hempfield Township. The same year, the world's longest covered bridge was built across the Susquehanna to Wrightsville, facilitating traffic flow across the river and reducing the need for the ferry. The bridge was long and wide, and had 54 stone piers. After handling traffic across the Susquehanna for 18 years, it was destroyed by high water, ice, and severe weather in the winter of 1832. A replacement covered bridge, the Pennsylvania Railroad Bridge, was built within two years.
In February 1826, the Pennsylvania state legislature approved $300,000 for the construction of a canal along the Susquehanna’s eastern shore to bypass rapids and shallows and make the river navigable anywhere along its route. Begun in 1832, the Pennsylvania Canal went into operation in 1833. It started at Columbia, stretching north to the junction of the Juniata River. Travelers could use the canal system to go west from Columbia to Pittsburgh, Lake Erie, Ohio and [present-day] West Virginia, north into New York, and east to Philadelphia. Canal boats could often be seen at the Bruner coal wharf, operated by H.F. Bruner & Sons at North Front and Bridge Streets. The canal was originally planned to extend south from Columbia on the east side of the river, but local property owners objected. Instead, a two-tiered towpath was constructed along the south side of the bridge to transport boats across the river using horse and mule teams. The boats then linked with the Susquehanna and Tidewater Canal along the western shore at Wrightsville. This part of the canal system, which afforded passage to Baltimore or the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal, opened 
in 1840. Several years later, a small dam was constructed across the river to form a pool that allowed steamboats to tow the canal boats.
Canals could not be used in winter due to ice and floods, which caused damage that had to be repaired in the spring. These limitations, combined with an increase in railroad traffic, led to the decline of the canals. The Columbia Canal finally closed in 1901, the same year that Wright's Ferry ceased to operate.
During this time, Columbia also became a stop on the Underground Railroad. Slaves seeking freedom were transported across the Susquehanna, fed and given supplies on their way north to other states and Canada. To slave hunters from the South, the slaves seemed to simply disappear, leading one hunter to declare that there “must be an underground railroad here.”
Any idealistic view of abolition in Columbia is surely tested, however, by the occurrence of a significant race riot in 1834. The riot erupted in August of that year when white workers revolted against working alongside Black freedmen. Citing a document drafted by the rioters themselves, historian David Roediger explains that typical of other race riots of the period, white rioters feared "a plot by employers and abolitionists to open new trades to Blacks and 'to break down the distinctive barrier between the colors that the poor whites may gradually sink into the degraded condition of the Negroes - that, like them, they may be slaves and tools'." The Rioters' declaration called for 'colored freeholders' to be "singled out for removal from the Borough". The riot resulted in a large number of African American residents being forced from their homes and their property destroyed.
1834 saw the completion of another bridge spanning the river. Built by James Moore and John Evans at a cost of $157,300, this bridge, too, enjoyed the distinction of being the world’s longest covered bridge. This year also saw construction of the first railway line linking Columbia and Philadelphia, which subsequently became part of the Pennsylvania Railroad. Named the Philadelphia and Columbia Railroad, it officially opened in October, 1834.
By 1852, regular rail transportation from Columbia to Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Harrisburg made the town the commercial center for the area halfway between the county seats of Lancaster and York.
Columbia's role in the Civil War.
In early 1863, as the American Civil War raged, a number of local black citizens enlisted in the 54th Massachusetts Infantry, a regiment composed of black soldiers serving under white officers. The unit achieved fame in an assault on Fort Wagner in South Carolina. Stephen Swails, one of its members, may have been the first African-American officer commissioned during the Civil War. Other local citizens fought in various regiments of the United States Colored Troops. Some of these veterans are buried in a cemetery located near Fifth Street.
On June 28, 1863, during the Gettysburg Campaign, the replacement covered bridge was burned by Columbia residents and the Pennsylvania state militia to prevent Confederate soldiers of the Army of Northern Virginia from entering Lancaster County. General Robert E. Lee had hoped to invade Harrisburg from the rear and move eastward to Lancaster and Philadelphia, and in the process destroy railroad yards and other facilities. Under General Jubal A. Early’s command and following Lee’s orders, General John B. Gordon was to place Lancaster and the surrounding farming area “under contribution” for the Confederate Army’s war supplies and to attack Harrisburg from the east side of the river, while another portion of Lee’s army advanced from the west side. General Early was given orders to burn the bridge but hoped instead to capture it, while Union forces under the command of Colonel Jacob G. Frick and Major Granville O. Haller, hoping to save the bridge, were forced to burn it. Owners of the bridge petitioned Congress repeatedly for reimbursement well into the 1960s, but were denied payment.
With the Union Army of the Potomac hastening northward into Maryland and Pennsylvania, Robert E. Lee ordered his widely scattered forces to withdraw to Heidlersburg and Cashtown (not far from Gettysburg) to rendezvous with other contingents of the Confederate Army. The burning of the Columbia-Wrightsville Bridge thwarted one of Lee's goals for the invasion of Pennsylvania, and General Gordon later claimed the skirmish at Wrightsville reinforced the erroneous Confederate belief that the only defensive forces on hand were inefficient local militia, an attitude that carried over to the first day of the Battle of Gettysburg.
Postwar growth.
After the wartime bridge burning, a tugboat, "Columbia", was used to tow canal boats across the river. In 1868, yet another replacement covered bridge was built, but was destroyed by a hurricane in 1896. The next bridge, the Pennsylvania Railroad Bridge, was a steel open bridge which carried the tracks of the Pennsylvania Railroad and a two-lane roadway for cars. It was dismantled for scrap by November 1964, but its stone piers, which supported the Civil War-era bridge, can still be seen today, running parallel to the Veterans’ Memorial Bridge on Route 462. The piers have become the site of present-day “Flames Across the Susquehanna” bridge-burning reenactments sponsored by Rivertownes PA USA.
In 1875, a new three-story grand town hall opened, featuring a second-floor auditorium that seated over 900 and was used as an opera house. The second floor's ceiling was higher than those of the first and third floors; each level contained 60 windows. The building also included office shops, council chambers, storerooms and market stalls. A -high bell tower, holding the town clock, crowned the building. The clock was visible from all over the borough, and its bell was audible throughout the surrounding countryside. The building was destroyed by fire in February 1947, but was rebuilt as a one-story municipal building that exists today.
Trolley service for the borough and surrounding area was established in 1893, allowing Columbians to take advantage of economic opportunities in Lancaster and other nearby towns. Between 1830 and 1900, the borough’s population increased from 2,046 to 12,316.
Flourishing industry.
By the mid-19th century, Columbia had become a busy transportation hub with its ferry, bridge, canal, railroad and wharves. It was a major shipping transfer point for lumber, coal, grain, pig iron, and people. Important industries of the time included warehousing, tobacco processing, iron production, clockmaking, and boat building. Prominent local companies included the Ashley and Bailey Silk Mill, the Columbia Lace Mill, and H.F. Bruner & Sons.
From about 1854 to 1900, an industrial complex existed in and around Columbia, Marietta and Wrightsville that included 11 anthracite iron furnaces and related structures, as well as canal and railroad facilities servicing them. By 1887, that number had grown to 13 blast furnaces, all operating within a three-mile (5 km) radius of Columbia. The furnaces, which produced pig iron, exemplified the technology of the day through their use of anthracite coal and hot blast for smelting iron ore, a process that dominated the iron industry before the widespread use of coke as a fuel. Since northeastern Pennsylvania was a rich source of anthracite coal, anthracite-fired furnaces using locally available iron ores were built throughout eastern Pennsylvania, helping to make the state a leader in iron production in the latter half of the 19th century. Lancaster County also became a leader in pig iron production during this time, with the river towns' complex of furnaces contributing significantly to its output.
20th century.
Changes in the new century.
By 1900, the town’s population had grown to over 12,000, with a 50% increase from 1880 to 1900. Some of the items produced by its industries were silk goods, lace, pipe, laundry machinery, stoves, iron toys, flour, lumber, and wagons. By this time Wright’s Ferry had ceased its operations, having been supplanted by rail and bridge traffic.
In 1930, yet another bridge, the Veterans Memorial Bridge, was opened to improve traffic flow across the Susquehanna. It first opened as a toll bridge; to avoid the toll, in the coldest winter months some daring motorists would cross on the firmly frozen river. Later that same decade, many of the city's brick sidewalks were converted to concrete; the bronze plaques of the concrete installers are still visible today.
Economic decline.
The start of the 20th century brought economic challenge to Columbia as local industries declined. The lumber industry eventually disappeared as surrounding woodlands became depleted. As Chestnut Hill iron ores became scarce as well, the iron furnaces shut down. Eventually, the steel rolling mills also ceased operation. In 1906, the Pennsylvania Railroad opened a new facility in Enola, across the river from Harrisburg, which decreased the significance of Columbia’s railroad. By 1920, the population had dropped over 10% to 10,836.
The Great Depression accelerated Columbia’s economic slide. The Pennsylvania Railroad’s service to the north and the south was eliminated. World War II increased employment, but did not bring long-term prosperity to the borough.
By 1960, population had returned to its 1900 level. In 1965 a detailed study of Columbia’s basic strengths and weaknesses was released, but its suggestions went mostly unheeded. The Wright's Ferry Bridge, which opened in 1972, only served to divert traffic around Columbia. The growth and prosperity experienced in some Lancaster County towns bypassed Columbia for the remainder of the 20th century.
21st century.
Although the United States Census Bureau reported that as of the last year of the 20th century, the population of Columbia had been only 10,311 people, by 2010 this figure had grown to 10,400. The Susquehanna River flows past the Borough of Columbia into the Chesapeake Bay. The city of Lancaster is the county seat.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 10,311 people, 4,287 households, and 2,589 families residing in the borough. The population density was 4,227.8 people per square mile (1,631.6/km²). There were 4,595 housing units at an average density of 1,884.1 per square mile (727.1/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 91.34% White, 4.42% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.41% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 1.70% from other races, and 1.90% from two or more races. 4.49% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 4,287 households, out of which 28.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.5% were married couples living together, 19.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.6% were non-families. 33.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 3.01.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 24.3% under the age of 18, 8.7% from 18 to 24, 29.2% from 25 to 44, 20.5% from 45 to 64, and 17.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.5 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $32,385, and the median income for a family was $26,309. Males had a median income of $27,528 versus $22,748 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $14,626. About 11.5% of families and 11.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.3% of those under age 18 and 10.6% of those age 65 or over.
Museums and historic sites.
For over half a century, Columbia has been home to the headquarters of the National Association of Watch and Clock Collectors (NAWCC), whose campus on Poplar Street includes a clock tower, clock museum, library, research center, and "School of Horology," for training professional clock and watch repairers.
Schools.
Schools in Columbia are part of the Columbia Borough School District.

</doc>
<doc id="84893" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84893" title="Denver, Pennsylvania">
Denver, Pennsylvania

Denver is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 3,332 at the 2000 census.
History.
Founded by Hans Bucher, a Swiss immigrant, in 1735. Soon after it was called Bucher's Thal. In the 1800s a train station was built and the town was renamed Union Station. Residents were growing weary of being referred to as a train station so in 1881, after researching post offices in the country, Adam Brubaker found only one named Denver. On November 1, 1881, the town was officially renamed Denver.
The Butcher's Mill Covered Bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.
Geography.
Denver is located at (40.233859, -76.137088).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2010, there were 15,391 people, 5,507 households, and 4,204 families residing in the borough. The population density was 11,839.2 people per square mile (4571.1/km²). There were 5,705 housing units at an average density of 4388.5 per square mile (1694.4/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 96.5% White, 1.2% Black or African American, 2.2% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.8% from other races, and 1.1% from two or more races. 2.28% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 5,507 households, out of which 36.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.4% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.4% were non-families. 21.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.04.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 26.5% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 24.1% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 14.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.7 years. For every 100 females there were 98.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.1 males.
From the 2000 Census, The median income for a household in the borough was $49,085, and the median income for a family was $53,125. Males had a median income of $36,250 versus $23,715 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $19,706. About 4.5% of families and 5.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.4% of those under age 18 and 3.3% of those age 65 or over.
Education.
Denver Borough is served by the Cocalico School District.

</doc>
<doc id="84894" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84894" title="East Petersburg, Pennsylvania">
East Petersburg, Pennsylvania

East Petersburg is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 4,450 at the 2000 census.
Geography.
East Petersburg is located at (40.100079, -76.352649).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,450 people, 1,708 households, and 1,327 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,688.6 people per square mile (1,420.0/km²). There were 1,766 housing units at an average density of 1,463.8 per square mile (563.5/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 95.03% White, 1.35% Black or African American, 0.16% Native American, 1.10% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 1.17% from other races, and 1.12% from two or more races. 2.85% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 1,708 households, out of which 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.5% were married couples living together, 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.3% were non-families. 18.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 2.95.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 25.1% under the age of 18, 6.2% from 18 to 24, 29.9% from 25 to 44, 25.2% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.2 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $52,222, and the median income for a family was $53,910. Males had a median income of $38,700 versus $25,455 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $21,979. About 2.0% of families and 2.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.9% of those under age 18 and 3.3% of those age 65 or over.
Schools.
Schools in East Petersburg are part of the Hempfield School District. Children are served by the following schools within the district:
Government.
East Petersburg is governed by a seven-person Borough Council and Mayor. As of July 2012 the Council President was Cappy Panus and the Mayor was Jeff Geoghan
East Petersburg Borough Council members are elected to four-year staggered terms. Borough Council elects from members a president of council and a vice-president. Borough Council serves as the legislative body elected by citizens of the borough. Council is responsible for establishing policies, enacting by ordinance or resolution laws and regulations to implement approved policies, providing for annual budgets and appropriations of funds for lawful expenditures, appointing members to boards, and commissions established by Borough Council. Mayor is responsible for law enforcement and holds a non-voting membership in the council, but with tie-breaking and veto powers per the Pennsylvania Borough Code.
Borough Council meets twice per month to conduct business - a formal meeting the first Tuesday and a business meeting the third Tuesday.
The East Petersburg Borough Website is http://www.eastpetersburgborough.org/
Community.
East Petersburg Day is celebrated annually in September with a parade and community festivities in East Petersburg Community Park, East Petersburg Swimming Pool, which is operated by the Hempfield Area Recreation Commission, is home to the East Petersburg Swim Team. Penn Legacy Soccer Club operates several playing fields within the borough.
East Petersburg Historical Society and
East Petersburg Sportman Association are also located within the borough.
Churches.
There are six churches that are part of the neighborhoods in the Borough of East Petersburg.
East Petersburg Churches is a community resource website from the pastors and churches in East Petersburg, PA. Through this website they invite guests to explore; their churches, their collaborative efforts in the East Petersburg neighborhoods, helpful resources and information about the East Petersburg Minister's Meetup.

</doc>
<doc id="84895" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84895" title="Dīs Pater">
Dīs Pater

Dīs Pater was a Roman god of the underworld, later subsumed by Pluto or Hades (Hades was Greek). Originally a chthonic god of riches, fertile agricultural land, and underground mineral wealth, he was later commonly equated with the Roman deities Pluto and Orcus, becoming an underworld deity.
"Dīs Pater" was commonly shortened to simply Dīs. This name has since become an alternative name for the underworld or a part of the underworld, such as the City of Dis of "The Divine Comedy".
It is often thought that Dīs Pater was also a Celtic god. This confusion arises from the second-hand citation of one of Julius Caesar's comments in his "Commentaries on the Gallic Wars" VI:18, where he says that the Gauls all claimed descent from "Dīs Pater". However, Caesar's remark is a clear example of interpretatio Romana: what Caesar meant was that the Gauls all claimed descent from a Gaulish god that reminded him of the Roman Dīs Pater, that is, a chthonic deity associated with prosperity and fertility. Different possible candidates exist for this role in Celtic religion, such as Gaulish Sucellus, Irish Donn and Welsh Beli Mawr, among others.
Etymology.
Cicero in his "De Natura Deorum" derives the name of "Dīs Pater" from "dives", suggesting a meaning of "father of riches", directly corresponding to the name "Pluto" (from Greek Πλούτων, "Ploutōn", meaning "wealthy"). Many of Cicero's etymological derivations are not to be taken seriously, and may indeed have been intended ironically. Nevertheless, this particular derivation of Cicero's has been accepted by some authors, some even suggesting that "Dīs Pater" is a direct loan translation of "Ploutōn".
Alternatively, he may be a secondary reflex of the same god as Jupiter (Proto-Indo-European Dyeus Ph₂ter).
Mythology.
Like Pluto, Dīs Pater eventually became associated with death and the underworld because the wealth of the earth—gems and precious metals—was considered in the domain of the Greco-Roman underworld. As a result, Dīs Pater was over time conflated with the Greek god Hades.
In being conflated with Pluto, Dīs Pater took on some of the Greek mythological attributes of Pluto/Hades, being one of the three sons of Saturn (Greek: Cronus) and Ops (Greek: Rhea), along with Jupiter and Neptune. He ruled the underworld and the dead beside his wife, Proserpina (Greek: Persephone). In literature, Dīs Pater was commonly used as a symbolic and poetic way of referring to death itself.
Worship.
In 249 BC and 207 BC, the Roman Senate under Senator Lucius Catelli ordained special festivals to appease Dīs Pater and Proserpina. Every hundred years, a festival was celebrated in his name. According to legend, a round marble altar, "Altar of Dīs Pater and Proserpina" (), was miraculously discovered by the servants of a Sabine called Valesius, the ancestor of the first consul. The servants were digging in the Tarentum on the edge of the Campus Martius to lay foundations following instructions given to Valesius's children in dreams, when they found the altar underground. Valesius reburied the altar after three days of games. Sacrifices were offered to this altar during the "Ludi Saeculares" or "Ludi Tarentini". It may have been uncovered for each occasion of the games, to be reburied afterwards, a clearly chthonic tradition of worship. It was rediscovered in 1886–87 beneath the Corso Vittorio Emanuele in Rome.
In addition to being considered the ancestor of the Gauls, Dīs Pater was sometimes identified with the Sabine god Soranus. In southern Germany and the Balkans, Dīs Pater had a Celtic goddess, Aericura, as a consort. Dīs Pater was rarely associated with foreign deities in the shortened form of his name, "Dis".

</doc>
<doc id="84896" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84896" title="Orcus">
Orcus

Orcus () was a god of the underworld, punisher of broken oaths in Italic and Roman mythology. As with Hades, the name of the god was also used for the underworld itself. In the later tradition, he was conflated with Dis Pater. Hades is the Greek equivalent of Pluto.
Orcus was portrayed in paintings in Etruscan tombs as a hairy, bearded giant. A temple to Orcus may have existed on the Palatine Hill in Rome. It is likely that he was transliterated from the Greek daemon Horkos, the personification of Oaths and a son of Eris.
Origins.
The origins of Orcus may have lain in Etruscan religion. The so-called Tomb of Orcus, an Etruscan site at Tarquinia, is a misnomer, resulting from its first discoverers mistaking as Orcus a hairy, bearded giant that was actually a figure of a Cyclops.
The Romans sometimes conflated Orcus with other gods such as Pluto, Hades, and Dis Pater, god of the land of the dead. The name "Orcus" seems to have been given to his evil and punishing side, as the god who tormented evildoers in the afterlife. Like the name Hades (or the Norse Hel, for that matter), "Orcus" could also mean the land of the dead.
Orcus was chiefly worshipped in rural areas; he had no official cult in the cities. This remoteness allowed for him to survive in the countryside long after the more prevalent gods had ceased to be worshipped. He survived as a folk figure into the Middle Ages, and aspects of his worship were transmuted into the wild man festivals held in rural parts of Europe through modern times. Indeed, much of what is known about the celebrations associated with Orcus come from medieval sources.
Survival and later use.
From Orcus' association with death and the underworld, his name came to be used for demons and other underworld monsters, particularly in Italian where "orco" refers to a kind of monster found in fairy-tales that feeds on human flesh. The French word "ogre" (appearing first in Charles Perrault's fairy-tales) may have come from variant forms of this word, "orgo" or "ogro"; in any case, the French "ogre" and the Italian "orco" are exactly the same sort of creature. An early example of an "orco" appears in Ludovico Ariosto's "Orlando Furioso", as a bestial, blind, tusk-faced monster inspired by the Cyclops of the "Odyssey"; this "orco" should not be confused with the "orca", a sea-monster also appearing in Ariosto.
This "orco" was the inspiration to J. R. R. Tolkien's "orcs" in his "The Lord of the Rings". In a text published in "The War of the Jewels", Tolkien stated:
Note. The word used in translation of Q"[uenya]" urko, S"[indarin]" orch, is Orc. But that is because of the similarity of the ancient English word orc, 'evil spirit or bogey', to the Elvish words. There is possibly no connexion between them. The English word is now generally supposed to be derived from Latin Orcus.
Also, in an unpublished letter sent to Gene Wolfe, Tolkien also made this comment:
Orc I derived from Anglo-Saxon, a word meaning demon, usually supposed to be derived from the Latin Orcus—Hell. But I doubt this, though the matter is too involved to set out here.
From this use, countless other fantasy games and works of fiction have borrowed the concept of the orc. 
The name Orcus plays a role in the "Dungeons & Dragons" role-playing game as Orcus, Prince of the Undead.
Orcus appears as a character in Christopher Moore's "A Dirty Job".
The Kuiper belt object 90482 Orcus is named after Orcus. This was because Orcus was sometimes considered to be another name for Pluto, and also because Pluto and 90482 Orcus are both plutinos.

</doc>
<doc id="84897" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84897" title="Hempfield, Pennsylvania">
Hempfield, Pennsylvania

Hempfield is an unincorporated community in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Hempfield is a tiny locale in West Hempfield Township a few miles west of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
History.
Hempfield Township was one of the original townships set off when the boundaries of Lancaster County were surveyed in 1729. At that time, it included the present areas of East Hempfield Township, West Hempfield Township, Manor Township, and the Boroughs of Columbia, Mountville, and East Petersburg.
Hempfield is said to be so named on account of the hemp fields that used to be in the area.

</doc>
<doc id="84898" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84898" title="Intercourse, Pennsylvania">
Intercourse, Pennsylvania

Intercourse (population: 1,274 as of 2010 census) is an unincorporated village and census-designated place in Leacock Township, Lancaster County in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania, east of Lancaster on Pennsylvania Route 340. Intercourse is a popular site for tourists because of its location in "Amish country" and its sexually suggestive name. The movie "Witness" was filmed in Intercourse as well as other parts of the surrounding area, and "For Richer or Poorer" was set there, though not filmed in Intercourse. Because of the town's unusual name, the sign posts for the town are frequently targeted by thieves.
Economy.
Tourism and farming are major industries in the area. Small businesses sell Amish crafts, food, and give horse and buggy rides. The town thrives on thousands of tourists who visit the region each year. Most of the land surrounding the town is farmland.
History.
Intercourse was founded in 1754. The community was originally named Cross Keys, after a local tavern. Intercourse became the name in 1814. The village website gives several theories for the origins of the name. 
"Another theory concerns two famous roads that crossed here. The Old King's highway from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh (now the Old Philadelphia Pike) ran east and west through the center of the town. The road from Wilmington to Erie intersected in the middle. The joining of these two roads is claimed by some to be the basis for the town 'Cross Keys' or eventually 'Intercourse'. A final idea comes from the use of language during the early days of the Village. The word 'intercourse' was commonly used to describe the 'fellowship' and 'social interaction and support' shared in the community of faith, which was much a part of a rural village like this one."
Popular culture.
The village's name is often the subject of jokes relating to sexual intercourse. Along with that of Blue Ball, Pennsylvania, the publishers of "Eros Magazine" sought mailing privileges from the postmasters of the town. Intercourse and Blue Ball are often named in lists of "delightfully-named towns" in Pennsylvania Dutchland, along with Gap, Fertility, Mount Joy, Lititz, Bareville, Bird-in-Hand and Paradise. A gag on "The Cleveland Show" imagined the town as the location for a spin-off show centred on the libidinous Glenn Quagmire. The British motoring show "Top Gear" featured the town's sign while passing through Pennsylvania in a race to New York City during the show's sixteenth series. The Ellen DeGeneres Show had a What's Wrong with These Photos? Picture of a Welcome to Intercourse sign for the subject. Kay Lenz's titular character in the 1973 film "Breezy" reveals that she is from Intercourse ("I've heard all the jokes," she tells William Holden, "and you have to pass through Faithful to get there.") It was also mentioned in "The Simpsons" episode "The Old Man and the 'C' Student" where it was revealed that Superintendent Chalmers lived there.

</doc>
<doc id="84899" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84899" title="Lititz, Pennsylvania">
Lititz, Pennsylvania

Lititz is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, six miles (approximately 10 km) north of the city of Lancaster.
History.
Lititz was founded by members of the Moravian Church in 1756 and was named after a castle (mentioned form of name is German; Czech name of this castle is "Litice") in Bohemia near the village of Kunvald where the ancient Bohemian Brethren's Church had been founded in 1457. The roots of the Moravian Brethren's Church date back to the ancient Bohemian Brethren's Church.
For a century, only Moravians were permitted to live in Lititz. Until the middle of the 19th century, only members of the congregation could own houses; others were required to lease. The lease-system was abolished in 1855, just five years before the beginning of the Civil War. More information can be found in the book "A Brief History of Lititz Pennsylvania" by Mary Augusta Huevener, published in 1947.
During a part of the American Revolution, the Brethren's House, built in 1759, was used as a hospital. A number of soldiers died and were buried here. Lititz is also home to Linden Hall School, the oldest all-girls boarding school in the United States. Located adjacent to the Moravian Church on of land, Linden Hall School was founded by the Moravians in 1746, a decade before the borough was incorporated.
Lititz has been holding a town-wide celebration of Independence Day since 1813. This annual spectacle attracts many tourists and former residents that return for the annual Queen of Candles Pageant and fireworks display in Lititz Springs Park. The park itself is decorated each year, rather extravagantly, with wooden beams and trestles placed from side to side of the stone-walled stream and stretching nearly the entire length of the park. The trestles are fitted sockets for white candles to be placed and lit during the celebration. The first candle has traditionally been lit by the year's Queen of Candles pageant winner. Musical performances by such groups as "Flamin' Dick and the Hot Rods" then follow. The park also hosts festivities for children and a plethora of food offerings comparable to those at a county fair. The 4th of July parade is sponsored by Lititz Lions. Another summer event is the annual art show sponsored by the Village Art Association of Lititz and the craft show sponsored by the Lititz Rotary Club, which extends from the Lititz Springs Park out into Broad Street (PA-501) and Main Street (PA-772).
During 2006 a year-long celebration was held commemorating the 250th anniversary of the naming of the town. Some of the major events included a service and commemoration ceremony in Lititz Springs Park on Sunday June 11, the official naming ceremony on Monday June 12, a fountain show in the park called "Symphonic Springs" during August 20–26th, and a New Year's celebration.
Lititz is often named in lists of "delightfully-named towns" in Pennsylvania Dutchland, along with Intercourse, Blue Ball, Mount Joy, Bareville, Bird-in-Hand and Paradise.
In 2013, Lititz was announced the winner of Budget Travel's "America's Coolest Small Towns" competition from among 15 other finalists.("America's Coolest Small Towns 2013").
Geography.
Lititz is located at .
Pennsylvania Routes 772 (Orange and Main Streets) and 501 (Broad Street) run through the town.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all land.
Law and government.
Lititz, along with Elizabeth and Warwick townships and part of Penn Township, is located in the Warwick School District.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 9,029 people, 3,732 households, and 2,407 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 3,827 housing units at an average density of 1,646.2 per square mile (636.9/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 97.23% White, 0.44% African American, 0.09% Native American, 0.87% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.50% from other races, and 0.83% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.52% of the population.
There were 3,732 households, out of which 29.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.9% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.5% were non-families. 31.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.91.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 23.0% under the age of 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 28.8% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 21.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 86.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.2 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $40,417, and the median income for a family was $52,028. Males had a median income of $36,126 versus $25,997 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $20,601. About 2.6% of families and 4.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.9% of those under age 18 and 8.7% of those age 65 or over.
Recent controversies.
Water pollution.
Lititz has been criticized for its alleged poor ground water quality. The water in Lititz Springs Park tested at 19.1 for nitrates on August 8, 2007 in a test paid for by the "Lancaster Intelligencer Journal". Lititz' water quality was also criticized in February 2008 after Listerine was discharged into the aquifer by the nearby Johnson & Johnson chemical plant, and residents complained about a "minty" taste. Johnson and Johnson initially denied any responsibility, but the problem was later identified as the result of a leaky pipe on the company's property. In 2008, the "Intelligencer Journal" reported that the nonprofit group League of Humane Voters created a website "dedicated to the cause of monitoring issues surrounding the Lititz watershed."
Lititz Borough has a multimillion-dollar water treatment plant that removes pollutants so that the water distributed to residents meets all Federal and State regulations.
Borden family murders.
Lititz received national press coverage on November 13, 2005, after David G. Ludwig, 18, shot and killed Michael and Cathryn Borden. Ludwig fled the scene with their daughter and an Amber Alert was issued for her.
Ludwig was arrested with the minor daughter in Indiana, extradited to Lancaster County, and held on several charges including criminal homicide. He pleaded guilty to two counts of first degree murder, reckless endangerment, statutory sexual assault and firearms violations. Ludwig received two consecutive life sentences without the possibility of parole plus 9.5 to 19 years for the weapons charges. Ludwig lived within the borough of Lititz. The Bordens lived outside the borough in Warwick Township. After the murders, police seized 54 guns from the home of Gregory and Jane Ludwig, including three assault rifles, shotguns and handguns.
Racist incident.
The town received national press coverage on October 11, 2007, after three white 16-year-old students allegedly yelled racial slurs and threw paper wads at minority students outside the 1,600-student Warwick High School. School officials vowed to discipline the three students with suspension or expulsion, tighten security, and ban Confederate flags on school property. Six students were charged with disorderly conduct.
The superintendent said the incident was revealed only after a teacher overheard other students discussing it and alerted administrators.
In order to "to rebound from a string of racially motivated incidents," the community commemorated the 2009 Martin Luther King Jr. Day holiday with a call to unity. The community's churches, including the Lititz Moravian Church made "clear statement[s against racism."
Warwick School District mascot.
The high school's current mascot depicts the profile of a Native American warrior. Since 1999, some Lititz residents, teachers, and students have criticized the mascot both as a racist stereotype and for misrepresenting a Native American religious symbol. The campaign to eliminate the mascot resurfaced during the 2009–2010 school year, as the district renovated the high school's football field; current plans call for a spear design in the center of the field. In 2010, the district removed the warrior logo from the high school's sign, replacing it with a black-and-red seal featuring the letter "W". The warrior image has been used less frequently since 1999; since then, residents have suggested to the school board that the mascot be changed to something representative of Lititz, such as "Wilbur Buds," a well-known product of the local Wilbur Chocolate Company.
In 2010, the Warwick School Board passed a resolution that from now on, the Native American Head & Spear logos will be used for athletics and the black-and-red seal featuring the letter 'W' will be used for academics.
In January 2011, a member of a group in support of the Warrior logo/name presented a donation to the school board from a bumper sticker sale that was conducted the previous fall.
Sister city.
A Sister City relationship between Lititz and Kunvald (Czech Republic) was established on June 11, 2006, during the celebration of the 250th anniversary naming of Lititz. The ceremony took place in Lititz Springs Park. Their Pennsylvania sister city is Emmaus, PA.

</doc>
<doc id="84900" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84900" title="Juventas">
Juventas

Juventas was the ancient Roman goddess whose sphere of tutelage was youth and rejuvenation. She was especially the goddess of young men "new to wearing the toga" "(dea novorum togatorum)"—that is, those who had just come of age.
Several voluntary associations "(collegia)" were formed for Juventas in the Italian municipalities, as attested by inscriptions.
Temple and early cult.
Juventas had a shrine within the cella of Minerva on the Capitoline that probably dates no earlier than 218 BC, at which time she was identified with the Greek Hebe. According to Dionysius and Livy, both she and the god Terminus are supposed to have "refused" the ceremony of reversal "(exauguratio)" performed when Tarquin wished to rebuild the temple district on the Capitoline. Although other deities were relocated, these two were incorporated into the new structure. Dionysius also records that the semi-legendary king Servius Tullius established a temple fund for Juventas, to which each family had to contribute. The view that she was a part of archaic Roman religion depends mainly on these two aetiological legends, as she has no presence in the early history of Roman festivals.
On the advice of the Sibylline books, which were consulted amid anxieties surrounding the Second Punic War, Juventas was included in sacrifices in 218 BC relating to a lectisternium, a public banquet at which divine images were displayed as if the deities were participating. Like other deities whose cult was ordained by the Sibylline books, Juventas was venerated "ritu graeco", according to "Greek" rite. Also at the lectisternium of 218 BC, a supplication was performed at the Temple of Hercules. In Greek myth, the divinized Hercules had Hebe as his wife. The cultivation of both deities at the time of the Second Punic War seems intended to reinvigorate men of fighting age: Juventas "was regarded as a powerful divine force rendering a vital gift of strength at a critical moment." This occasion is also the first time the "Genius Publicus" ("Genius of the People") is recorded. After the disastrous Battle of Lake Trasimene in April 217 BC, Juventas, Hercules, and the Genius Publicus were excluded for a time from divine honors, as they were not felt to have been efficacious. Marcus Livius Salinator vowed a temple to her during the Battle of the Metaurus, when he faced Hasdrubal in 207 BC—an indication that Juventas was still felt to have potency.
A procession "(supplicia canum)" in which Romans carried crucified dogs passed between the Temple of Juventas and that of Summanus. A late source dates the "punishment of the dogs" to August 3.
Imperial era.
On Imperial coins, Juventas and Spes ("Hope") are often associated with the reigning Caesar.
A supplication to Juventas and Spes marked the anniversary of Augustus's coming of age. Juventas was among the many "Virtutes" ("Virtues") to appear on the coinage of Antoninus Pius.

</doc>
<doc id="84903" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84903" title="Manheim, Pennsylvania">
Manheim, Pennsylvania

Manheim (Pennsylvania Dutch: "Mannem") is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 4,858 at the 2010 census. The borough was named after Mannheim, in Germany.
History.
Manheim was laid out by Henry William Stiegel in 1762 on a land tract in Rapho Township, Pennsylvania, though it wasn't incorporated until 1838. He set out to build an industrial empire and founded the Manheim Glassworks. After financial failure, he was forced to sell the development in 1775. After several failed attempts at resurrecting the Manheim Glassworks, it closed in 1780.
The first railroad train came into Manheim on January 1, 1862, with the completion of the first division of the Columbia and Reading Railroad. In 1884, another forward step was the laying of water pipes and the beginning of service by the Manheim Electric Company, which set up a plant in Bomberger's Mill at the end of Mill Street.
Geography.
Manheim is located at (40.162564, -76.396466).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,784 people, 1,989 households, and 1,362 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,416.7 people per square mile (1,319.4/km²). There were 2,075 housing units at an average density of 1,481.9 per square mile (572.3/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 96.38% White, 0.63% African American, 0.08% Native American, 1.00% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.61% from other races, and 1.28% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.69% of the population.
There were 1,989 households, out of which 30.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.6% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.5% were non-families. 26.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.88.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 24.6% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 30.2% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 16.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.3 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $41,855, and the median income for a family was $46,987. Males had a median income of $33,961 versus $21,792 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $21,276. About 4.1% of families and 5.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.7% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.
Public Services.
The Manheim Community Library [http://www.manheimlibrary.org/manheim/site/default.asp?manheimNav=|//www.manheimlibrary.org/manheim/site/default.asp?manheimNav=] located on High Street is a member of the Library System of Lancaster County.
Education.
The borough is served by the Manheim Central School District and Manheim Central High School.
Attractions.
Manheim is also home to the World's Largest Auto Auction. The Manheim Auto Auction is located on Route 72 with many daily visitors. It is open for business every Friday.
The Manheim Community Farm Show is held the first week of every October at the Fairgrounds. 
Root's Market, home of the oldest single family-run country market in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania is located just south of Manheim.
Literary and artistic depiction.
Anna Balmer Myers, born in Manheim, authored several works depicting Lancaster County. Her "I Lift My Lamp" is a historical novel about the early settlement of the County, Henry William Stiegel and his glassworks in Manheim, a Mennonite Eby family, and the Ephrata Cloister.
The woodblock print artist William S. Rice was born in Manheim, and depicted the town in several of his works.

</doc>
<doc id="84904" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84904" title="Marietta, Pennsylvania">
Marietta, Pennsylvania

Marietta is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 2,689 at the 2000 census. It is located on the east bank of the Susquehanna River just north of Columbia.
Geography.
Marietta is located at (40.057169, -76.555955).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Market Street runs the whole length of the town. The east/west divider is Waterford Avenue.
History.
The borough was named for the wives of two settlers.
The Ashley and Bailey Silk Mill, Joseph Bucher House, Chickies Historic District, Linden House, and Marietta Historic District are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,689 people, 1,092 households, and 723 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,587.0 people per square mile (1,384.3/km²). There were 1,168 housing units at an average density of 1,558.1 per square mile (601.3/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 95.83% White, 2.49% African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.52% from other races, and 0.82% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.90% of the population.
There were 1,092 households, out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.3% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.7% were non-families. 25.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.99.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 24.8% under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 34.3% from 25 to 44, 22.0% from 45 to 64, and 10.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 99.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $40,563, and the median income for a family was $46,905. Males had a median income of $33,783 versus $21,863 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $19,265. About 6.7% of families and 9.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.8% of those under age 18 and 11.0% of those age 65 or over.
Education.
Primary and secondary education in the borough of Marietta is provided by the Donegal School District. Students kindergarten through second grade attend the Donegal Primary School in Mount Joy, PA. Students third grade through sixth grade attend the Donegal Intermediate School located on PA 441 just outside the borough.
Students seventh grade through eighth grade attend the Donegal Junior High School in Mount Joy, PA. Students ninth grade through twelfth grade attend the Donegal Senior High School.

</doc>
<doc id="84905" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84905" title="Millersville, Pennsylvania">
Millersville, Pennsylvania

Millersville is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. At the 2000 census the population was 7,774.
Geography.
Millersville is located at (40.006148, -76.351349).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,774 people, 2,335 households, and 1,272 families residing in the borough. The population density was 3,811.4 people per square mile (1,471.4/km²). There were 2,469 housing units at an average density of 1,210.5 per square mile (467.3/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 92.45% White, 4.31% African American, 0.06% Native American, 1.12% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 0.98% from other races, and 1.00% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.55% of the population.
There were 2,335 households, out of which 19.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.4% were married couples living together, 6.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 45.5% were non-families. 29.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.74.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 10.9% under the age of 18, 45.0% from 18 to 24, 15.4% from 25 to 44, 13.9% from 45 to 64, and 14.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females there were 83.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.1 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $38,425, and the median income for a family was $53,110. Males had a median income of $36,327 versus $25,636 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $15,773. About 3.7% of families and 16.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.2% of those under age 18 and 6.8% of those age 65 or over.
History.
Originally farmland in then Manor Township owned by John Miller. Millerstown was a crossroads for goods and sales brought from the local farming communities into Lancaster City. Later the town's name was changed to Millersville and was incorporated as a separate borough in Lancaster County. Millersville is the location of the first teachers academy, established in 1854. Later, in 1855, it was chartered as a state normal school. Today, the college is Millersville University, which is part of the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education.

</doc>
<doc id="84907" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84907" title="Neffsville, Pennsylvania">
Neffsville, Pennsylvania

Neffsville is a suburban community in Manheim Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Being unincorporated, Neffsville has no boundaries. The U.S. Geological Survey Place Names database locates Neffsville at 40°6'0"N 76°18'20"W. The retailer and restaurant center of Neffsville is near 2500 Lititz Pike.
Manheim Township High School, on School Road is considered to be in Neffsville. Manheim Township school district serves 5400 students with 637 employees, 423 of them holding teaching certificates.
According to local tradition, Neffsville was named for the family of Johan Christian Neff, originally from Gerolsheim, Germany, who was aboard the ship Lydia when she arrived in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on September 19, 1743. Johan moved to Lampeter Township in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, married the former Frena Howery, and they had three children there - Christian in 1750, Henry in 1754, and Esther in 1757. All three married in Lancaster County, but Christian's life ended in Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania and Esther's in Lebanon County, Pennsylvania. An elementary school on School Road was named for Henry Holt.
Shank's extracts.
Jacob Shank, a Neffsville pharmacist, introduced "Shank's Compound Flavoring of Vanilla Bean" in 1899 to improve the taste of his medicines. The product is still made today, and Shank's is now the second-largest primary vanilla supplier in North America, as well as supplying other extracts, flavorings and spices. The Shanks family sold the business in 1959, and it is no longer in Neffsville, but many collectors prize their old extract bottles that read "Shank's Extracts - Neffsville, Pa."
Popular culture.
Neffsville, Pennsylvania also appears in the animated movie Free Birds

</doc>
<doc id="84908" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84908" title="New Holland, Pennsylvania">
New Holland, Pennsylvania

New Holland (Pennsylvania Dutch: "Seischwamm") is a borough in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, USA. As of the 2010 United States Census, the population was 5,378, up from 5,092 in the 2000 United States Census.
History.
New Holland was settled in 1728 by John Michael and John Phillip Ranc (Ranck). Before it became known as New Holland, it had been called Hog Swamp, Earltown and New Design. New Holland, Pennsylvania is the twin city of Longvic, France.
The New Holland Machine Company and John Casper Stoever Log House are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Geography.
New Holland is located at (40.102095, -76.087646). According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 5,092 people, 2,084 households, and 1,448 families residing in the borough. The population density was 2,444.2 people per square mile (945.2/km²). There were 2,159 housing units at an average density of 1,036.3 per square mile (400.8/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 90.34% White, 1.02% African American, 0.08% Native American, .025% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 2.57% from other races, and 1.67% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.42% of the population.
In the borough the population was spread out, with 22.4% under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 16.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 95.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.1 males.
The median income for a household in the borough was $44,446, and the median income for a family was $50,758. Males had a median income of $37,002 versus $25,766 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $20,187. About 3.4% of families and 5.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.5% of those under age 18 and 1.5% of those age 65 or over.
Public services.
Education.
The Eastern Lancaster County School District has its district headquarters in New Holland, Pennsylvania. This site also houses both Garden Spot High School and Garden Spot Middle School. Elementary schools within the district include: New Holland, Blue Ball and Brecknock.
This area is served by the Eastern Lancaster County Library http://www.elancolibrary.org (ELANCO Library), formerly known as New Holland Library. The ELANCO Library is located on Chestnut St. in New Holland and is a member of the Library System of Lancaster County.
Culture.
The New Holland Farmer's Fair is an annual festival held in New Holland.

</doc>
<doc id="84909" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84909" title="Paradise, Pennsylvania">
Paradise, Pennsylvania

Paradise is a census-designated place (CDP) in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States with a zip code of 17562. The population was 1,129 at the 2010 census.
Paradise, like Intercourse, is a popular site in Pennsylvania Dutch Country for tourists who like the name of the town; they are together often named in lists of "delightfully named towns" in Pennsylvania Dutchland, along with Blue Ball, Lititz, Bareville, Fertility, Bird-in-Hand, and Mount Joy. It was the setting of the 1994 comedy film "Trapped in Paradise".
Geography.
Paradise is located at (40.009469, -76.124781).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which, of it is land and of it (2.59%) is water.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,028 people, 363 households, and 284 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 907.4 people per square mile (351.3/km²). There were 386 housing units at an average density of 340.7/sq mi (131.9/km²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.57% White, 1.75% African American, 0.10% Asian, 0.10% from other races, and 0.49% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.07% of the population.
There were 363 households, out of which 35.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.2% were married couples living together, 9.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.5% were non-families. 16.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.08.
In the CDP the population was spread out, with 27.2% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 29.2% from 25 to 44, 22.5% from 45 to 64, and 12.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 96.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.8 males.
The median income for a household in the CDP was $41,875, and the median income for a family was $44,583. Males had a median income of $31,800 versus $21,917 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $18,700. About 1.8% of families and 7.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.0% of those under age 18 and 8.5% of those age 65 or over.
This town is actually the real Amish Paradise, as it is in Amish country and it is named Paradise.

</doc>
<doc id="84910" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84910" title="Hippo Regius">
Hippo Regius

Hippo (Regius) (Hippone) is the ancient name of the modern city of Annaba, in Algeria. 
Hippo Regius was a major city in Roman Africa, hosting several early Christian councils and home to the philosopher and theologian Augustine of Hippo.
History.
Hippo Regius was a Tyrian colony on the west coast of the bay to which it gave its name: "Hipponensis Sinus", first settled by the Phoenicians probably in the 12th century BC; the surname "Regius" 'of the King' was bestowed on it as one of the places where the Numidian kings resided. The name Hippo is from Punic "ûbôn" 'harbor.'
A maritime city near the mouth of the river Ubus, it became a Roman colonia which prospered and became a major city in Roman Africa.
It is perhaps most famous as the bishopric of Saint Augustine of Hippo in his later years. Advancing eastwards along the North African coast, the Vandals laid siege to the walled city of Hippo Regius in 430. Inside, Saint Augustine and his priests prayed for relief from the invaders, knowing full well that the fall of the city would spell conversion (to Arianism) or death for many Roman Christians. On 28 August 430, three months into the siege, St. Augustine (who was 75 years old) died, perhaps from starvation or stress, as the wheat fields outside the city lay dormant and unharvested. After 14 months, hunger and the inevitable diseases were ravaging both the city inhabitants and the Vandals outside the city walls. The city fell to the Vandals and King Geiseric made it the first capital of the Vandal kingdom until the capture of Carthage in 439.
It was conquered by the Eastern Roman Empire in 534 AD and was kept under Byzantine rule until 698 AD, when it fell to the Muslims; the Arabs rebuilt the town in the eighth century. The city's later history is treated under its modern (Arabic and colonial) names.
About three kilometres distant in the eleventh century the Berber Zirids established the town of "Beleb-el-Anab", which the Spaniards occupied for some years in the sixteenth century, as the French did later, in the reign of Louis XIV. France took this town again in 1832. It was renamed Bone or Bona, and became one of the government centres for the département of Constantine in Algeria. It had 37,000 inhabitants, of whom 10,800 were original inhabitants, consisting of 9,400 Muslims and 1400 naturalized Jews. 15,700 were French and 10,500 foreigners, including many Italians.
Ecclesiastical history.
Hippo was an ancient bishopric, one of many suffragans in the former Roman province of Numidia, since French colonial rule a part of the residential see of Constantine. It contains some ancient ruins, a hospital built by the Little Sisters of the Poor and a fine basilica dedicated to St. Augustine. Under St. Augustine there were at least three monasteries in the diocese besides the episcopal monastery.
The diocese was established around 250 AD. We know seven bishops of Hippo:
It was suppressed around 450 AD.
Council of Hippo.
Three church councils were held at Hippo (393, 394, 426) and more synods - also in 397 (two sessions), June and September and 401, all under Aurelius.
The synods of the Ancient (North) African church were held, with but few exceptions (e.g. Hippo, 393; Milevum, 402) at Carthage. We know from the letters of St. Cyprian that, except in time of persecution, the African bishops met at least once a year, in the springtime, and sometimes again in the autumn. Six or seven synods, for instance, were held under St. Cyprian's presidency during the decade of his administration (249-258), and more than fifteen under Aurelius (391-429). The Synod of Hippo of 393 ordered a general meeting yearly, but this was found too onerous for the bishops, and in the Synod of Carthage (407) it was decided to hold a general synod only when necessary for the needs of all Africa, and it was to be held at a place most convenient for the purpose. Not all the bishops of the country were required to assist at the general synod. At the Synod of Hippo (393) it was ordered that "dignities" should be sent from each ecclesiastical province. Only one was required from Tripoli (in Libya), because of the poverty of the bishops of that province. At the Synod of Hippo (393), and again at the Synod of 397 at Carthage, a list of the books of Holy Scripture was drawn up, and these books (including some considered apocryphal by Protestants) are still regarded as the constituents of the Catholic canon.
Titular episcopal see.
The Hippo(ne) diocese was nominally revived in 1400 as Catholic Latin titular bishopric of the (lowest) episcopal rank, for which no incumbent is recorded.
It ceased to exist on 23 September 1867, when the see was formally united with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Constantine.

</doc>
<doc id="84911" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84911" title="Vesper">
Vesper

Vesper means "evening" in Classical Latin. It can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84912" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84912" title="Salus (disambiguation)">
Salus (disambiguation)

Salus may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84913" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84913" title="Rheems, Pennsylvania">
Rheems, Pennsylvania

Rheems is a census-designated place (CDP) in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States situated between the boroughs of Elizabethtown and Mount Joy and is located entirely within West Donegal Township, Pennsylvania. The population was 1,598 during the 2010 census.
Geography.
Rheems is located at .
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,557 people, 513 households, and 439 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 1,321.7 people per square mile (509.5/km²). There were 521 housing units at an average density of 442.3/sq mi (170.5/km²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.75% White, 0.26% African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.45% Asian, 0.13% Pacific Islander, 0.32% from other races, and 0.96% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.09% of the population.
There were 513 households, out of which 42.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 78.6% were married couples living together, 5.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 14.4% were non-families. 10.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.88 and the average family size was 3.10.
In the CDP the population was spread out, with 26.5% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 33.2% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.8 males.
The median income for a household in the CDP was $55,170, and the median income for a family was $54,643. Males had a median income of $41,047 versus $26,683 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $19,530. None of the families and 0.6% of the population were living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and none of those over 64.

</doc>
<doc id="84915" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84915" title="Willow Street, Pennsylvania">
Willow Street, Pennsylvania

Willow Street is a census-designated place (CDP) in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The population was 7,578 at the 2010 census. In the early part of the 20th century the main thoroughfare in town was lined with willow trees on both sides for the length of the town, hence the community's name. As time marched on and the town grew, the road was widened and sidewalks were installed which required the trees be removed. Only a few of the original trees remain to this day.
Geography.
Willow Street is located at .
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , all of it land.
Demographics.
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,258 people, 3,203 households, and 2,091 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 1,340.9 people per square mile (518.0/km²). There were 3,323 housing units at an average density of 613.9/sq mi (237.2/km²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 98.26% White, 0.37% African American, 0.04% Native American, 0.51% Asian, 0.36% from other races, and 0.45% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.18% of the population.
There were 3,203 households, out of which 19.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.7% were married couples living together, 4.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.7% were non-families. 32.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 25.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.15 and the average family size was 2.69.
In the CDP the population was spread out, with 17.1% under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 18.9% from 25 to 44, 17.1% from 45 to 64, and 42.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 54 years. For every 100 females there were 80.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 76.4 males.
The median income for a household in the CDP was $45,103, and the median income for a family was $58,611. Males had a median income of $43,580 versus $25,523 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $25,292. About 1.2% of families and 2.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.6% of those under age 18 and 3.8% of those age 65 or over.

</doc>
<doc id="84916" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84916" title="Pax">
Pax

Pax or PAX may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84917" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84917" title="Leta">
Leta

Leta may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84918" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84918" title="Parcae">
Parcae

In ancient Roman religion and myth, the Parcae (singular, Parca) were the female personifications of destiny, often called the Fates in English. Their Greek equivalent were the Moirai.
Names and history.
They controlled the metaphorical thread of life of every mortal and immortal from birth to death. Even the gods feared the Parcae. Jupiter also was subject to their power.
The names of the three Parcae were:
The earliest extant documents referencing these deities are three small stelae "(cippi)" found near ancient Lavinium shortly after World War II. They bear the inscription:
"Neuna fata, Neuna dono, Parca Maurtia dono"
The names of two of the three Roman Parcae are recorded ("Neuna" = Nona, "Maurtia" = Morta) and connected to the concept of "fata".
Nona was supposed to determine a person's lifespan on the "dies lustricus", that is, the day on which the name of the child was chosen, which occurred on the ninth day from birth for a male and the eighth for a female.
The recurrence of the nundinae was also considered a "dies festus" and as such "nefas" by some Roman scholars as Julius Caesar and Cornelius Labeo, because on it the "flaminica dialis" offered the sacrifice of a goat to Jupiter in the Regia.
One of the sources for the Parcae is "Metamorphoses" by Ovid, II 654, V 532, VIII 452, XV 781.

</doc>
<doc id="84920" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84920" title="Faun">
Faun

The faun (, , "phaunos", ) is a mythological half human–half goat (from the head to the waist being human, but with the addition of goat horns) manifestation of forest and animal spirits that would help or hinder humans at whim. They are often associated with the satyrs of Greek mythology.
Origins.
Romans believed fauns inspired fear in men traveling in lonely, remote or wild places. They were also capable of guiding humans in need, as in the fable of The Satyr and the Traveller, in the title of which Latin authors substituted the word "Faunus". Fauns and satyrs were originally quite different creatures: whereas fauns are half-man and half-goat, satyrs originally were depicted as stocky, hairy, ugly dwarfs or woodwoses with the ears and tails of horses or asses. Satyrs also were more woman-loving than fauns, and fauns were rather foolish where satyrs had more knowledge.
Ancient Roman mythological belief also included a god named Faunus often associated with enchanted woods and the Greek god Pan and a goddess named Fauna who were goat people. 
Fauns in art.
The "Barberini Faun" (located in the Glyptothek in Munich, Germany) is a Hellenistic marble statue from about 200 BCE, found in the Mausoleum of the Emperor Hadrian (the Castel Sant'Angelo) and installed at Palazzo Barberini by Cardinal Maffeo Barberini (later Pope Urban VIII). Gian Lorenzo Bernini restored and refinished the statue.
The House of the Faun in Pompei, dating from the 2nd century BCE, was so named because of the dancing faun statue that was the centerpiece of the large garden. The original now resides in the National Museum in Naples and a copy stands in its place.
The French symbolist Stéphane Mallarmé's famous masterpiece "L'après-midi d'un faune" (published in 1876) describes the sensual experiences of a faun who has just woken up from his afternoon sleep and discusses his encounters with several nymphs during the morning in a dreamlike monologue. The composer Claude Debussy based his symphonic poem "Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune" (1894) on the poem.
It has become a noticeable trend recent years for some fantasy artists to depict fauns as having the hind legs, tail, and antlers of a deer instead those of a goat. This may be due to the English word "faun" sounding the same as the English word for baby deer "fawn".

</doc>
<doc id="84921" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84921" title="Fama (band)">
Fama (band)

Fama is a Regional Mexican/Tejano band originally from Houston, Texas.
Biography.
Formed in 1989 by brothers Javier, Oscar, and Edgar Galvan, and friend Eddie Gonzalez, the band gained prominence in the mid-1990s with a string of hit albums. They were given the nickname "The Golden Boys" by Tejano music DJs. The members at the height of their popularity were Javier Galvan, vocalist; Oscar Galvan, bassist; Edgar Galvan, Saxophone; Eddie Gonzalez, Trumpet; Israel Dominguez, keyboards & accordion; John Barraza, guitar; Eddie Dominguez (1990–94)(2001–Present), drums and Ruben Enriquez (1994–97), drums.
Fama signed with Discos CBS International in 1989 which became Sony Discos in 1992. Javier Galvan was then signed with Joey Records and is now under his own label (Famuz).
Javier was nominated for "Song of the Year" in the BMI Awards in 1994.
Fama was awarded the "Premio Lo Nuestro" for "Revelacion Del Año" in 1994.
In 2007 Javier won "Mejor Vocalista Masculino" and Fama won "Mejor Grupo Tejano" in the "Premios de la Musica Latina"
Fama has earned recognition as one of the most dominating bands in the Latin music industry across the
nation. A string of career hit singles came their way in the mid '90s' when "Lagrimas De Alegria", "Quiero
Volverte A Ver", "Querer Tu Amor", "Te Voy A Enseñar", "Ojitos Color Cafe", "Amor Perdoname",
"Boulevard De Sueños" and "Llorando" dominated the airwaves as they spent numerous weeks atop Latin
Billboard airplay charts, earning numerous awards and nominations from BMI, Premios Lo Nuestro, and
Univision's Premios A La Musica Latina. In the process, Fama also appeared on numerous international
Latin television programs such as: Despierta America, El Gordo y La Flaca, Escadalo TV, Padrisimo,
Control, and Sabado Gigante. Statistically speaking, Fama have scaled unbelievable heights, carving a
permanent place in the music scene. Fama are one of the few artists to have shattered international
barriers. With 18 recorded albums, of which four were certified gold, three platinum, and one double
platinum, it is undeniably clear of how or why FAMA's fans by the thousands have responded positively and
passionately. Fama's last album entitled "Con La Misma Pasión" solidifies their commitment to their music,
their style, and their fans. As that CD proves, they are stronger than ever. This commitment to their fans,
without question, displays another measurement of the talent and versatility that will genuinely take Fama to
new heights of achievement in their musical career. Fama continues its saga as a band whose music has
truly stood the test of time. Fama's sound represents the past, present and future of their genre.
In August 2009 Javier Galvan retired from Fama and signed over the Fama name to John Barraza and Eddie Dominguez. The band continues to tour nationally.
May 2010, Fama signed to the record label AMMX Records.

</doc>
<doc id="84924" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84924" title="Soviet submarine K-77">
Soviet submarine K-77

K-77 was a "Project 651" (also known by its NATO reporting name of ) cruise missile submarine of the Soviet Navy. Her keel was laid down in the Krasnoye Sormovo shipyard in Gorky on 31 January 1963. She was launched on 11 March 1965, and commissioned on 31 October 1965 into the Northern Fleet.
"K-77" was built later in the Juliett class, so her hull was conventional steel and her battery was of the conventional lead-acid type, rather than the austenitic steel and silver-zinc batteries used in the first Julietts. "K-77" was also used as the set for the motion picture "", starring Harrison Ford and Liam Neeson.
Career.
The details of "K-77"’s career remain largely unknown. Juliett-class submarines were used to follow United States Navy aircraft carrier battle groups in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Circumstantial evidence indicates that "K-77" often patrolled the Mediterranean, off the coast of West Africa, and at least once in the Caribbean Sea near the United States Virgin Islands. Papers found aboard her during inspection in Helsinki suggest that she had shadowed Norwegian s.
At some point in her career, "K-77" (the K standing for крейсерская, "kreyserskaya" — "cruiser") was redesignated "Б-77" (the Б standing for большая, "bolshaya" — "large"). In 1987, "K-77" was withdrawn from the blue-water Northern Fleet and transferred to the Baltic Fleet. The redesignation and transfer could easily be related.
The Soviet Navy began withdrawing the Julietts from active service in 1988. "K-77" was decommissioned sometime after 1991, and by the end of 1994, all Julietts had been retired.
Post-decommissioning.
Finland.
At the end of the Cold War, Finnish businessman Jari Komulainen, who was married to the only daughter of President of Finland Mauno Koivisto, used his influence as Finland's "first son-in-law" to convince the Russian government to lease him a Project 641 "Foxtrot" class submarine, probably the ex-. Komulainen opened it to the public in Helsinki in the spring of 1993 as a tourist attraction. He then purchased two s, one Juliett replacing the Foxtrot in 1994, becoming a bar and restaurant as well as a tourist attraction. Komulainen believed that his restaurant had been "K-81", based on a metal plate discovered inside the boat. However, it later transpired that that plate and others bearing different numbers were provided for the crew to display on the submarine's sail during surface running to confuse NATO reconnaissance aircraft. Komulainen also held a beauty pageant “Miss Submarine” at his Soviet submarine K-77. Model Anitra Ahtola won the competition who became later his third wife.
As a restaurant, "K-77" was modestly successful, but was not lucrative enough to satisfy Komulainen. In 1998, he leased his submarine to a Canadian promoter, who towed it to Tampa Bay, Florida. However, the intended mooring location in the harbor was too shallow and the investors were forced to move the proposed tourist attraction to a more remote site. Soon, the promoter filed for bankruptcy, and "K-77" reverted to Komulainen.
eBay.
Komulainen did not want to repeat the nerve-wracking trans-Atlantic tow, and instead tried at least twice to auction the submarine on eBay — auctions #222791130, ending on 20 December 1999, and #270148521, ending on 7 March 2000. In each case, bidding was to start at US$1 million. No bids were received.
"Widowmaker".
The eBay auction, however, caught the attention of Intermedia Film Equities Ltd., who chartered "K-77" for US$200,000 and towed her to Halifax, Nova Scotia, in 2000 to become the set for the motion picture "", starring Harrison Ford and Liam Neeson. The boat was modified with fiberglass to make it resemble the "K-19" submarine.
Museum.
In 2002, after the film wrapped up, the submarine was purchased by the USS "Saratoga" Museum Foundation,[http://www.saratogamuseum.org/] towed to Collier Point Park in Providence, Rhode Island, and opened to the public in August 2002. Prior to its sinking, the K-77 offered public tours and a comprehensive educational program in accordance with New Standards and attuned to the advancement requirements of both Girl and Boy Scout programs.
When the Saratoga Museum Foundation took possession of the submarine it was described as K-81, which is what was stated in the initial press releases from the Saratoga Museum Foundation. After spending months refurbishing the interior, which included removing several bulkheads, moving large pieces of equipment and going deep into the bilges, there were documents found that provided incontrovertible proof that the submarine was the K-77 and not the K-81 as earlier thought. The records confirming this information include maintenance reports, equipment exchanges, radio messages, duty rosters, log entries and torpedo firing exercises, which all identify the submarine as K-77.
Sinking.
The submarine sank on April 18, 2007 after a storm, and plans were made to raise it off the river bottom. The Museum's theory on why the submarine sank is that a modified hatch was not properly watertight. Recovery efforts by U.S. Navy and Army divers began in June 2008 as part of a project to train military divers through real-world, community-based projects.
On June 2, 2008, divers from Mobile Diving and Salvage Unit Two in Norfolk, Virginia arrived and began preparations to raise the submarine. On July 25, 2008, she was brought to the surface by US Navy and Army divers. The work of pumping out water was completed in August 2008. The sub was badly deteriorated and in need of substantial repair.
On August 11, 2009, RI Recycled Metals LLC towed the sub to a facility 1000 yards from the museum site so that it could be scrapped.

</doc>
<doc id="84925" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84925" title="Luna (goddess)">
Luna (goddess)

In ancient Roman religion and myth, Luna is the divine embodiment of the Moon (Latin "luna"; cf. English "lunar"). She is often presented as the female complement of the Sun (Sol) conceived of as a god. Luna is also sometimes represented as an aspect of the Roman triple goddess ("diva triformis" ), along with Proserpina and Hecate. "Luna" is not always a distinct goddess, but sometimes rather an epithet that specializes a goddess, since both Diana and Juno are identified as moon goddesses.
In Roman art, Luna's attributes are the crescent moon plus the two-yoke chariot ("biga" ). In the "Carmen Saeculare", performed in 17 BC, Horace invokes her as the "two-horned queen of the stars" ("siderum regina bicornis" ), bidding her to listen to the girls singing as Apollo listens to the boys.
Varro categorized Luna and Sol among the visible gods, as distinguished from invisible gods such as Neptune, and deified mortals such as Hercules. She was one of the deities Macrobius proposed as the secret tutelary of Rome. In Imperial cult, Sol and Luna can represent the extent of Roman rule over the world, with the aim of guaranteeing peace.
Luna's Greek counterpart was Selene. In Roman art and literature, myths of Selene are adapted under the name of Luna. The myth of Endymion, for instance, was a popular subject for Roman wall painting.
Cult and temples.
Varro lists Luna among twelve deities who are vital to agriculture, as does Vergil in a different list of twelve, in which he refers to Luna and Sol as "clarissima mundi lumina", the world's clearest sources of light. Varro also lists Luna among twenty principal gods of Rome ("di selecti" ). In this list, Luna is distinguished from both Diana and Juno, who also appear on it.
The Romans dated the cultivation of Luna as a goddess at Rome to the semi-legendary days of the kings. Titus Tatius was supposed to have imported the cult of Luna to Rome from the Sabines, but Servius Tullius was credited with the creation of her temple on the Aventine Hill, just below a temple of Diana. The anniversary of the temple founding ("dies natalis" ) was celebrated annually on March 31. It first appears in Roman literature in the story of how in 182 BC a windstorm of exceptional power blew off its doors, which crashed into the Temple of Ceres below it on the slope. In 84 BC, it was struck by lightning, the same day the popularist leader Cinna was murdered by his troops. The Aventine temple may have been destroyed by the Great Fire of Rome during the reign of Nero.
As Noctiluna ("Night-Shiner") Luna had a temple on the Palatine Hill, which Varro described as shining or glowing by night. Nothing else is known about the temple, and it is unclear what Varro meant.
Juno as moon goddess.
The Kalends of every month, when according to the lunar calendar the new moon occurred, was sacred to Juno, as all Ides were to Jupiter. On the Nones, she was honored as Juno Covella, Juno of the crescent moon. Both Juno and Diana were invoked as childbirth goddesses with the epithet "Lucina".
Chariot of the moon.
Luna is often depicted driving a two-yoke chariot called a "biga", drawn by horses or oxen. In Roman art, the charioteer Luna is regularly paired with the Sun driving a four-horse chariot ("quadriga" ).
Isidore of Seville explains that the "quadriga" represents the sun's course through the four seasons, while the "biga" represents the moon, "because it travels on a twin course with the sun, or because it is visible both by day and by night—for they yoke together one black horse and one white."
Luna in her "biga" was an element of Mithraic iconography, usually in the context of the tauroctony. In the mithraeum of S. Maria Capua Vetere, a wall painting that uniquely focuses on Luna alone shows one of the horses of the team as light in color, with the other a dark brown.
A "biga" of oxen was also driven by Hecate, the chthonic aspect of the triple goddess in complement with the "horned" or crescent-crowned Diana and Luna. The three-form Hecate ("trimorphos" ) was identified by Servius with Luna, Diana, and Proserpina. According to the Archaic Greek poet Hesiod, Hecate originally had power over the heavens, land, and sea, not as in the later tradition heaven, earth, and underworld.

</doc>
<doc id="84927" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84927" title="Silvanus (mythology)">
Silvanus (mythology)

Silvanus (; meaning "of the woods" in Latin) was a Roman tutelary deity of woods and fields. As protector of forests ("sylvestris deus"), he especially presided over plantations and delighted in trees growing wild. He is also described as a god watching over the fields and husbandmen, protecting in particular the boundaries of fields. The similarly named Etruscan deity Selvans may be a borrowing of Silvanus, or not even related in origin.
Silvanus is described as the divinity protecting the flocks of cattle, warding off wolves, and promoting their fertility. Dolabella, a rural engineer of whom only a few pages are known, states that Silvanus was the first to set up stones to mark the limits of fields, and that every estate had three "Silvani:"
Hence "Silvani" were often referred to in the plural.
Attributes and associations.
Like other gods of woods and flocks, Silvanus is described as fond of music; the syrinx was sacred to him, and he is mentioned along with the Pans and Nymphs. Later speculators even identified Silvanus with Pan, Faunus, Inuus and Aegipan. He must have been associated with the Italian Mars, for Cato refers to him as "Mars Silvanus". In the provinces outside of Italy, Silvanus was identified with numerous native gods:
The Slavic god Porewit has similarities with Silvanus.
Worship.
The sacrifices offered to Silvanus consisted of grapes, ears of grain, milk, meat, wine and pigs. In Cato's "De Agricultura" an offering to "Mars Silvanus" is described, to ensure the health of cattle; it is stated there that his connection with agriculture referred only to the labour performed by men, and that females were excluded from his worship. (Compare Bona Dea for a Roman deity from whose worship men were excluded.) Virgil relates that in the very earliest times the Tyrrhenian Pelasgians had dedicated a grove and a festival to Silvanus.
In literature.
In works of Latin poetry and art, Silvanus always appears as an old man, but as cheerful and in love with Pomona. Virgil represents him as carrying the trunk of a cypress (), about which the following myth is told. Silvanus – or Apollo according to other versions – was in love with Cyparissus, and once by accident killed a pet hind belonging to Cyparissus. The latter died of grief, and was metamorphosed into a cypress.
In Edmund Spenser's epic poem "The Faerie Queene" (1590–96), Silvanus appears in Canto VI of Book I. His 'wyld woodgods' (Stanza 9) save the lost and frightened Lady Una from being molested by "Sans loy" and take her to him. They treat her as a Queen because of her great beauty. Spenser writes in Stanza 14:

</doc>
<doc id="84928" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84928" title="Fortuna (disambiguation)">
Fortuna (disambiguation)

Fortuna is the Roman goddess of luck.
Fortuna (Latin for "fortune") can also mean:

</doc>
<doc id="84929" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84929" title="Favonius">
Favonius

Favonius was a Roman "nomen", meaning "favorable". It applied to a number of Roman mythological and historical figures:
See also:

</doc>
<doc id="84931" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84931" title="Witness (1985 film)">
Witness (1985 film)

Witness is a 1985 American crime thriller film directed by Peter Weir and starring Harrison Ford and Kelly McGillis. The screenplay by William Kelley, Pamela Wallace, and Earl W. Wallace focuses on a detective protecting a young Amish boy who becomes a target after he witnesses a murder in Philadelphia.
The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won two, for Best Original Screenplay and Best Film Editing. It was also nominated for seven BAFTA Awards, winning one for Maurice Jarre's score, and was also nominated for six Golden Globe Awards. William Kelley and Earl W. Wallace won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay and the 1986 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay presented by the Mystery Writers of America.
Plot.
In 1984, in a Pennsylvania countryside, an Amish community attends the funeral of the man married to Rachel Lapp (McGillis), a young woman with an eight-year-old son Samuel (Haas). In her grief, she and Samuel traveling by train to visit Rachel's sister, which takes them into the city of Philadelphia. Samuel is amazed by the sights in the big city. While waiting for a connecting train at the 30th Street Station, Samuel goes into the men's room and witnesses two men attack and murder a third (Carhart), narrowly escaping detection as he hides in the bathroom stalls. Detective John Book (Ford) is assigned to the case and he and his partner, Sergeant Elton Carter (Jennings), question Samuel. It turns out the victim was an undercover police officer. Samuel is unable to identify the perpetrator from a number of mug shots or a police lineup, However, as Samuel walks around the police station, he notices a newspaper clipping in a display case in which narcotics officer James McFee (Glover) is honored for his exemplary service in the line of duty. Book sees Samuel point to the picture and quickly covers over his hand. John remembers that McFee was previously responsible for a drug raid on expensive chemicals used to make amphetamines, but the evidence had mysteriously disappeared.
John confides his suspicions to his superior officer, Chief Paul Schaeffer (Sommer), who advises John to keep the case secret so they can work out how to move forward. But John is later ambushed in a parking garage and badly wounded by McFee. Since only Schaeffer knew of John's suspicions, John realizes Schaeffer must have tipped McFee off, and is also corrupt.
John calls Carter and orders him to remove the Lapp file from the records. He then hides his car and uses his sister's car to return Rachel and Samuel to Lancaster County. While attempting to return to the city, Book passes out in the vehicle in front of their farm.
Rachel argues that taking John to a hospital would allow the corrupt police officers to find him while also putting Samuel in danger as well. Her father-in-law Eli (Rubes) reluctantly agrees to shelter him, despite his distrust for the gun-carrying outsider. John slowly recovers in their care, and begins to develop feelings for Rachel, who is likewise drawn to him. The Lapps' neighbor Daniel Hochleitner (Godunov) had hoped to court her, and this becomes a cause of friction. Later Rachel and John are caught dancing, and Eli takes her aside and warns that she could be shunned by the community if she continues on this path.
John's relationship with the Amish community grows as they learn he is skilled at carpentry. He is invited to participate in a barn raising for a newly married couple and gains Hochleitner's respect. However, the attraction between John and Rachel is evident and clearly concerns Eli and others, especially when she serves John first at a meal. That night, John comes upon Rachel as she bathes, and she stands half-naked before him, but he walks away, explaining the next morning that if they had made love the night before he would have to stay or she would have to leave.
John goes into town with Eli to use a payphone, and learns that Carter has been killed. He deduces that it was Schaeffer and McFee, who are intensifying their efforts to find him and are joined by a third corrupt officer, "Fergie" Ferguson (MacInnes), who helped McFee commit the murder at the station. In town, Hochleitner and the other Amish men are harassed by locals. Breaking with the Amish tradition of nonviolence, John retaliates with a punch. The fight is reported to the local police. Thus far, Schaeffer had been unable to track down which 'Lapp' family Book was hiding out with, but such an incident would surely tip off Schaeffer where to go.
His cover blown, John knows he must leave. Rachel is upset at the news. When she is alone she removes her bonnet and goes to John, and they passionately kiss.
The next day, the corrupt officers arrive at the Lapp farm and search for John. Warned by Eli, John orders Samuel to run to the neighbors for safety, then tricks Fergie into the corn silo and suffocates him under tons of corn. He retrieves Fergie's shotgun and kills McFee. Schaeffer then forces Rachel and Eli out of the house at gunpoint; Eli signals to Samuel (who has returned unseen) to ring the farm's bell. Although Schaeffer forces John to surrender, the loud clanging summons their neighbors. With so many witnesses, Schaeffer realizes he can't escape, and gives up; the local police arrive and arrest him.
As John prepares to leave, he says goodbye to Samuel in the fields. He and Rachel share a long, speechless stare on the porch, as both realize their feelings for each other could not continue. Finally, Eli wishes him well "out there among the English." Book smiles, drives away in his now-fixed car, and exchanges a wave of farewell to Hochleitner along the road out.
Production.
Producer Edward S. Feldman, who was in a "first-look" development deal with 20th Century Fox at the time, first received the screenplay for "Witness" in 1983. Originally entitled "Called Home" (which is the Amish term for death), it ran 182 pages long, the equivalent of three hours of screen time. The script, which had been circulating in Hollywood for several years, had been inspired by an episode of "Gunsmoke" William Kelley and Earl W. Wallace had written in the 1970s.
Feldman liked the concept, but felt too much of the script was devoted to Amish traditions, diluting the thriller aspects of the story. He offered Kelley and Wallace $25,000 for a one-year option and one rewrite, and an additional $225,000 if the film actually was made. They submitted the revised screenplay in less than six weeks, and Feldman delivered it to Fox. Joe Wizan, the studio's head of production, rejected it with the statement that Fox didn't make "rural movies".
Feldman sent the screenplay to Harrison Ford's agent Phil Gersh, who contacted the producer four days later and advised him his client was willing to commit to the film. Certain the attachment of a major star would change Wizan's mind, Feldman approached him once again, but Wizan insisted that as much as the studio liked Ford, they still weren't interested in making a "rural movie."
Feldman sent the screenplay to numerous studios and was rejected by all of them, until Paramount Pictures finally expressed interest. Feldman's first choice of director was Peter Weir, but he was involved in pre-production work for "The Mosquito Coast" and passed on the project. John Badham dismissed it as "just another cop movie", and others Feldman approached either were committed to other projects or had no interest. Then, as financial backing for "The Mosquito Coast" fell through, Weir became free to direct "Witness", which was his first American film. It was imperative filming start immediately, because a Directors Guild of America strike was looming on the horizon.
The film was shot on location in Philadelphia and the city and towns of Intercourse, Lancaster, Strasburg and Parkesburg. Local Amish were willing to work as carpenters and electricians, but declined to appear on film, so many of the extras actually were Mennonites. Halfway through filming, the title was changed from "Called Home" to "Witness" at the behest of Paramount's marketing department, which felt the original title posed too much of a promotional challenge. Principal photography was completed three days before the scheduled DGA strike, which ultimately failed to materialize.
There are a few times the dialect of the Pennsylvania Germans, popularly known as Pennsylvania Dutch, is heard in the film. In one scene, during construction of the new barn, a man says to John Book, "Du huschd hott gschofft. Sell waar guud!," which means "You worked hard. That was good!" But more often the Amish characters are heard speaking High German, the standard language of most German-speaking Europeans, which actually is used rarely by the Amish in particular, or Pennsylvania Germans in general.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Witness" was generally well received by critics and earned eight Academy Award nominations (including Weir's first and Ford's sole nomination to date).
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" rated the film four out of four stars, calling it "first of all, an electrifying and poignant love story. Then it is a movie about the choices we make in life and the choices that other people make for us. Only then is it a thriller—one that Alfred Hitchcock would have been proud to make." He concluded, "We have lately been getting so many pallid, bloodless little movies—mostly recycled teenage exploitation films made by ambitious young stylists without a thought in their heads—that "Witness" arrives like a fresh new day. It is a movie about adults, whose lives have dignity and whose choices matter to them. And it is also one hell of a thriller."
Vincent Canby of the "New York Times" said of the film, "It's not really awful, but it's not much fun. It's pretty to look at and it contains a number of good performances, but there is something exhausting about its neat balancing of opposing manners and values ... One might be made to care about all this if the direction by the talented Australian film maker, Peter Weir ... were less perfunctory and if the screenplay ... did not seem so strangely familiar. One follows "Witness" as if touring one's old hometown, guided by an outsider who refuses to believe that one knows the territory better than he does. There's not a character, an event or a plot twist that one hasn't anticipated long before its arrival, which gives one the feeling of waiting around for people who are always late."
"Variety" said the film was "at times a gentle, affecting story of star-crossed lovers limited within the fascinating Amish community. Too often, however, this fragile romance is crushed by a thoroughly absurd shoot-em-up, like ketchup poured over a delicate Pennsylvania Dutch dinner."
"Time Out New York" observed, "Powerful, assured, full of beautiful imagery and thankfully devoid of easy moralising, it also offers a performance of surprising skill and sensitivity from Ford."
"Halliwell's Film Guide" described the film as "one of those lucky movies which works out well on all counts and shows that there are still craftsmen lurking in Hollywood."
"Radio Times" called the film "partly a love story and partly a thriller, but mainly a study of cultural collision – it's as if the world of "Dirty Harry" had suddenly stumbled into a canvas by Brueghel." It added, "t's Weir's delicacy of touch that impresses the most. He ably juggles the various elements of the story and makes the violence seem even more shocking when it's played out on the fields of Amish denial."
The film was screened out of competition at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival.
Controversy.
The film was not well received by the Amish communities where it was filmed. A statement released by a law firm associated with the Amish claimed that their portrayal in the movie was not accurate. The National Committee For Amish Religious Freedom called for a boycott of the movie soon after its release, citing fears that these communities were being "overrun by tourists" as a result of the popularity of the movie, and worried that "the crowding, souvenir-hunting, photographing and trespassing on Amish farmsteads will increase." After the movie was completed, Pennsylvania governor Dick Thornburgh agreed not to promote Amish communities as future film sites. A similar concern was voiced within the movie itself, where Rachel tells a recovering John that tourists often consider her fellow Amish something to stare at, with some even being so rude as to trespass on their private property.
Box office.
The film opened in 876 theaters in the United States on February 8, 1985 and grossed $4,539,990 in its opening weekend, ranking No. 2 behind "Beverly Hills Cop". It remained at No. 2 for the next three weeks and finally topped the charts in its fifth week of release. It eventually earned $68,706,993 in the United States.
Legacy.
Negotiation expert William Ury summarized the film's climactic scene in a chapter titled "The Witness" in his 1999 book "Getting to Peace" (later republished with the alternate title "The Third Side: Why We Fight and How We Can Stop") and used the scene as a symbol of the power of ordinary citizens to resolve conflicts and stop violence.
Home media.
The film was released on Region 1 DVD on June 29, 1999. It is in letterboxed (non-anamorphic) widescreen format with audio tracks in English and French. The sole bonus feature is an interview with director Peter Weir.
The film was released on Region 2 DVD on October 2, 2000. As with the Region 1 release, it is in letterboxed non-anamorphic widescreen format. The audio tracks are in English, French, German, Italian, Czech, Spanish, and Polish and subtitles in English, Spanish, German, French, Italian, Portuguese, Swedish, Turkish, Danish, Hungarian, Dutch, Finnish, and Croatian. Bonus features include an interview with Weir and the original trailer.
A Special Collector's Edition was released on Region 1 DVD on August 23, 2005. It is now in anamorphic widescreen format with audio tracks in English and French and subtitles in English and Spanish. Bonus features include the five-part documentary "Between Two Worlds: The Making of Witness" (63 mins), a deleted scene, the original theatrical trailer, and three television ads. The Special Collector's Edition was released on Region 2 DVD on February 19, 2007, with different cover art and more extensive language and audio/subtitle options for European countries. A Blu-ray copy of the film was released on October 13, 2015.

</doc>
<doc id="84933" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84933" title="Kyrgyz language">
Kyrgyz language

Kyrgyz or Kirghiz (natively /, kyrgyzcha, or /, kyrgyz tili, ) is a Turkic language spoken by about four million people in Kyrgyzstan as well as China, Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uzbekistan, Pakistan and Russia. Kyrgyz is a member of the Kyrgyz–Kipchak subgroup of the Kypchak languages, and modern-day language convergence has resulted in an increasing degree of mutual intelligibility between Kyrgyz and Kazakh.
Kyrgyz was originally written in the Turkic runes, gradually replaced by an Arabic alphabet (in use until 1928 in USSR, still in use in China). Between 1928 and 1940, the Latin-based Uniform Turkic Alphabet was used. In 1940 due to general Soviet policy, a Cyrillic alphabet eventually became common and has remained so to this day, though some Kyrgyz still use the Arabic alphabet. When Kyrgyzstan became independent following the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991, there was a popular idea among some Kyrgyz people to make transition to the Latin alphabet (taking in mind a version closer to the Turkish alphabet, not the original alphabet of 1928–1940), but the plan has not been implemented yet.
History.
Pre-historic roots.
The first people known certainly by the name Kyrgyz are mentioned in early medieval Chinese sources as northern neighbors and sometime subjects of the Turkic steppe empire based in the area of Mongolia. The Kyrgyz people were involved in the international trade route system popularly known as the Silk Road no later than the late eighth century. By the time of the destruction of the Uighur Empire in 840 CE, they spoke a Turkic language little different from Old Turkic, and wrote it in the same runic script. After their victory over the Uyghurs the Kyrgyz did not occupy the Mongolian steppe, and their history for several centuries after this period is little known, though they are mentioned in medieval geographical works as living not far from their present location.
Colonization.
In the period of tsarist administration (1876–1917), the Kazakhs and the Kyrgyz both were called Kyrgyz, with what are now the Kyrgyz subdenominated when necessary as Kara-Kyrgyz "black Kyrgyz" (alternatively known as "The Great Kyrgyz").The modern Kyrgyz language did not have a standard written form until 1923, at which time an Arabic alphabet was introduced. That was changed to a Latin alphabet, developed by Kasym Tynystanov in 1928 and to a Cyrillic alphabet in 1940. In the years immediately following independence, another change of alphabet was discussed, but the issue does not seem to generate the same passions in Kyrgyzstan that it does in other former Soviet republics, perhaps because the Kyrgyz Cyrillic alphabet is relatively simple and is particularly well-suited to the language. Josip Broz Tito learned to speak Kyrgyz perfectly. Due to being ruled for a long time under Russian rules, Kyrgyz language has been mixed a lot with Russian.
Post-Soviet dynamics.
In the early 1990s, the Akayev government pursued an aggressive policy of introducing Kyrgyz as the official language, forcing the remaining European population to use Kyrgyz in most public situations. Public pressure to enforce this change was sufficiently strong that a Russian member of President Akayev's staff created a public scandal in 1992 by threatening to resign to dramatize the pressure for "Kyrgyzification" of the non-native population. A 1992 law called for the conduct of all public business to be converted fully to Kyrgyz by 1997. But in March 1996, Kyrgyzstan's parliament adopted a resolution making Russian an official language alongside Kyrgyz and marking a reversal of earlier sentiment. Substantial pressure from Russia was a strong factor in this change, which was part of a general rapprochement with Russia urged by Akayev.
Writing system.
The Kyrgyz in Kyrgyzstan use a Cyrillic alphabet, which uses all the Russian letters plus ң, ө, and ү.
In Xinjiang of China, an Arabic alphabet is used.
Morphology and syntax.
Case.
Nouns in Kyrgyz take a number of case endings that change based on vowel harmony and the sort of consonant they follow (see the section on phonology).
Normally the decision between the velar (, ) and uvular ( and ) pronunciation of and is based on the backness of the following vowel—i.e. back vowels imply a uvular rendering and front vowels imply a velar rendering—and the vowel in suffixes is decided based on the preceding vowel in the word. However, with the dative suffix in Kyrgyz, the vowel is decided normally, but the decision between velars and uvulars can be decided based on a contacting consonant, for example банк /bank/ 'bank' + GA yields банкка , not as predicted by the following vowel.
Pronouns.
Kyrgyz has eight personal pronouns:
The declension of the pronouns is outlined in the following chart. Singular pronouns (with the exception of сиз, which used to be plural) exhibit irregularities, while plural pronouns don't. Irregular forms are highlighted in bold.
In addition to the pronouns, there are several more sets of morphemes dealing with person.
Subordinate clauses.
To form complement clauses, Kyrgyz nominalises verb phrases. For example, "I don't know what I saw" would be rendered as "Мен эмнени көргөнүмдү билбейм" ("Men emneni körgönümdü bilbeym"): I what-ACC.DEF see-ing-1st.SG-ACC.DEF know-NEG-1st.SG, or roughly "I don't know my having seen what," where the verb phrase "I saw what" is treated as a nominal object of the verb "to know." The sentence above is also an excellent example of Kyrgyz vowel harmony; notice that all the vowel sounds are front vowels.
Several nominalisation strategies are used depending on the temporal properties of the relativised verb phrase: -GAn(dIK) for general past tense, -AAr for future/potential unrealised events, and -A turgan(dɯq) for non-perfective events are the most common. The copula has an irregular relativised form экен(дик) which may be used equivalently to forms of the verb бол- "be" (болгон(дук), болоор). Relativised verb forms may, and often do, take nominal possessive endings as well as case endings.

</doc>
<doc id="84934" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84934" title="Molly Ringwald">
Molly Ringwald

Molly Kathleen Ringwald (born February 18, 1968) is an American actress, singer, dancer, and author. Her first major role was in "The Facts of Life" (1979–80) before making her motion picture debut in the independent film "Tempest" (1982), which earned her a Golden Globe nomination. 
After subsequently appearing in the successful John Hughes films "Sixteen Candles" (1984), "The Breakfast Club" (1985), and "Pretty in Pink" (1986), Ringwald became a teen icon. She later starred in "The Pick-up Artist" (1987), and "For Keeps" (1988). She starred in many films in the 1990s, most notably "" (1992) and "The Stand" (1994). Ringwald is part of the "Brat Pack" and she was ranked number 1 on VH1's 100 Greatest Teen Stars. 
Early life.
Ringwald was born in Roseville, California, just outside Sacramento, the daughter of Adele Edith (née Frembd), a housewife and chef, and Robert Scott "Bob" Ringwald, a blind jazz pianist. Ringwald has two siblings, Beth and Kelly, and an older brother who died before she was born. She started her acting career at age five, appearing in a stage production of "Alice Through the Looking Glass" as the Dormouse. The next year, she recorded "I Wanna Be Loved by You", a music album of Dixieland jazz with her father and his group, the Fulton Street Jazz Band.
Life and career.
1978–83: Career beginnings.
In 1978, at the age of 10, Ringwald was chosen to play Kate in the West Coast production of "Annie", performing in Los Angeles.
In 1979, Ringwald appeared on the TV series "Diff'rent Strokes" and was selected to become part of a very large cast of that show's spin-off "The Facts of Life". She played Molly Parker, a perky, feminist student at Eastland Girls School. At the beginning of the second season, the show underwent a major revamp and most of the cast, including Ringwald, were cut from the show. Ringwald later said that Nancy McKeon replaced her to play a new character named Jo.
In 1980, Ringwald performed as a lead vocalist on two Disney albums. On the patriotic album "Yankee Doodle Mickey", Ringwald sang "This Is My Country", "The Star-Spangled Banner" and "God Bless America". She later performed one track on a Disney Christmas album. Turning toward motion pictures, she was nominated for a Golden Globe award for her role in the 1982 film "Tempest".
1984–89: "Sixteen Candles", "The Breakfast Club", "Pretty In Pink", and early success.
Ringwald rose to prominence with her breakout role in "Sixteen Candles" (1984). She was cast as Samantha Baker, a girl whose sixteenth birthday is forgotten. Ringwald's performance gained critical acclaim; many called her acting engaging. Ringwald would later say, "It is not a good idea to do remakes of great classic films" when asked if there would be a remake to "Sixteen Candles". 
Ringwald was regarded as a member of the so-called Brat Pack of 1980s teen actors but has said she was not really part of that group.
Ringwald gained more success when she was cast in another John Hughes film called "The Breakfast Club" (1985) which was a commercial and critical success. Ringwald was cast as Claire Standish, a spoiled rich, so-called sophisticate who is in detention for skipping class. Ringwald's performance gained strong reviews.
The following year, she was cast as Andie Walsh in another successful Hughes film called "Pretty In Pink" (1986). Ringwald's role as Andie went on to become one of her most recognizable performances. When first asked to be in "Pretty in Pink", Ringwald was reluctant, but after seeing how hard it was for the producers to find a replacement for her, she decided she would portray Andie in the film. Ringwald was offered a role in another John Hughes film called "Some Kind of Wonderful" (1987) but she turned down the role as she felt it was too similar to her other films she worked on with Hughes. After "Pretty In Pink", Ringwald planned to star in more mature roles. Ringwald was later featured on the cover of Time on May 26, 1986.
Ringwald was set to star in another Hughes film called "Oil and Vinegar"; the film was scrapped when John refused to rewrite the script. The film would have been about a soon-to-be-married man and a hitchhiking girl talking about their lives during the length of the car ride. In 1987, she was cast as Randy Jensen in "The Pick-up Artist", opposite Robert Downey, Jr. in one of his first lead roles. The film was met with mixed reviews while being a moderate commercial success. "The Pick-up Artist" focused on a womanizer who meets his match when he falls for a woman in debt to the Mafia.
The following year she starred in "For Keeps," a commercial success that received mixed reviews by critics but was well received by audiences. It is considered Ringwald's final teen movie. Ringwald portrayed Darcy Elliot, the editor at her high school paper, who gets pregnant by her long term boyfriend Stan, portrayed by Randall Batinkoff. Her performance received positive reviews. The film was praised by some critics for showing the struggles of teen pregnancy. She was later cast in "Fresh Horses". The film was met with generally negative reviews and under-performed at the box office. The film also starred Andrew McCarthy, who previously worked with Ringwald in "Pretty in Pink".
1990s–2010s: "The Stand" and continued acting.
In the early 1990s, Ringwald reportedly turned down the female lead roles in "Pretty Woman" and "Ghost". In the mid-1990s, Ringwald, who had been educated at a French high school in Los Angeles called Lycée Français de Los Angeles and is fluent in French, moved to Paris and starred in several French movies. She returned home to the US intermittently to appear in American movies and television. In 1990, Ringwald appeared in the James Scott-directed "Strike It Rich" alongside Robert Lindsay and John Gielgud. That same year she starred in "Betsy's Wedding" as Betsy Hopper. This film gained generally mixed reviews despite being a commercial success. Ringwald later starred in "" (1992). The film was based on the life of Alison Gertz.
In 2000 Ringwald appeared in the ensemble restaurant-themed film "In the Weeds," and in 2001 she had a cameo in the commercially successful "Not Another Teen Movie" that earned her an MTV Movie Award nomination. In theater, she wore a "Green, Green Dress" in Jonathan Larson's Off-Broadway musical "tick, tick... BOOM!", and headlined as Sally Bowles in Broadway's long-running revival of "Cabaret" from December 18, 2001 until April 28, 2002. In 2003 Ringwald appeared in "Enchanted April" on Broadway beginning April 8, but left after the June 15 performance due to pregnancy. In late 2004 she starred in the play "Modern Orthodox" on Broadway, opposite Jason Biggs and Craig Bierko. In 2006 she starred in the television film "The Wives He Forgot," and that fall and winter starred as Charity Hope Valentine in the national tour of the Broadway revival of the musical "Sweet Charity". She also played a supporting role as Molly McIntire's mother Helen in "". Ringwald starred in the ABC Family network's series "The Secret Life of the American Teenager", which debuted on July 1, 2008, playing the title teenager's mother. Ringwald read the audiobook edition of the 2012 novel "The Middlesteins" by Jami Attenberg.
2013–present: "Except Sometimes", "Wishin' and Hopin'" and future roles.
In early 2013, Ringwald released "Except Sometimes", a jazz record. It follows a tradition in jazz for the Ringwald family set by her father. “I grew up in a home filled with music and had an early appreciation of jazz since my dad was a jazz musician. Beginning at around age three I started singing with his band and jazz music has continued to be one of my three passions along with acting and writing. I like to say jazz music is my musical equivalent of comfort food. It's always where I go back to when I want to feel grounded,” Ringwald said in a statement.
Ringwald played Madame Frechette in the 2014 Lifetime Christmas film "Wishin' and Hopin. Ringwald plays Aunt Bailey in "Jem and the Holograms", raising Jerrica, her sister Kimber, and adopted daughters.
She is now a main character in the Family Channel original movie titled "Raising Expectations". The movie is set to release on May 8th 2016 on the Family Channel, Canada.
Personal life.
Ringwald was married to Valéry Lameignère, a French writer, in Bordeaux, France, on July 28, 1999; they divorced in 2002. She married Panio Gianopoulos, a Greek-American writer and book editor, in 2007. They have a daughter, Mathilda (born 2003), and twins, Adele and Roman (born 2009). Her pregnancy was written into the storyline of "The Secret Life of the American Teenager".
Public image.
Ringwald has stated that she was very aware of her public image during her teen years and that she tried to be a good role model for her fans. When asked about "For Keeps" (1988), Ringwald said, "I didn't want to give the wrong message to teenagers. I sort of felt a certain responsibility – I mean, I was a very, very famous teenager and I thought a lot of teenagers were looking up to me and emulating me, and I really didn't want to make a movie that said in any way that having a baby at that age was going to be easy." She was parodied on an episode of Family Guy being Peter Griffins wife in an alternate timeline.

</doc>
<doc id="84935" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84935" title="John Buchan">
John Buchan

John Buchan, 1st Baron Tweedsmuir (; 26 August 1875 – 11 February 1940) was a Scottish novelist, historian and Unionist politician who served as Governor General of Canada, the 15th since Canadian Confederation.
After a brief legal career, Buchan simultaneously began his writing career and his political and diplomatic careers, serving as a private secretary to the colonial administrator of various colonies in southern Africa. He eventually wrote propaganda for the British war effort in the First World War. Buchan was in 1927 elected Member of Parliament for the Combined Scottish Universities, but he spent most of his time on his writing career, notably writing "The Thirty-Nine Steps" and other adventure fiction. In 1935 he was appointed Governor General of Canada by King George V, on the recommendation of Prime Minister of Canada R. B. Bennett, to replace the Earl of Bessborough. He occupied the post until his death in 1940. Buchan proved to be enthusiastic about literacy, as well as the evolution of Canadian culture, and he received a state funeral in Canada before his ashes were returned to the United Kingdom.
Early life and education.
Buchan was the first child of John Buchan—a Free Church of Scotland minister—and Helen Jane Buchan. Buchan was brought up in Kirkcaldy, Fife, and spent many summer holidays with his maternal grandparents in Broughton, in the Scottish Borders. There he developed a love of walking, as well as for the local scenery and wildlife, which often featured in his novels; the name of a protagonist in several of Buchan's books—Sir Edward Leithen—is borrowed from the Leithen Water, a tributary of the River Tweed. The childhood he and his sister, Anna, shared was documented in her memoir, "Unforgettable, Unforgotten", written under the pseudonym O. Douglas.
After attending Hutchesons' Grammar School, Buchan was awarded a scholarship to the University of Glasgow at age 17, where he studied classics, wrote poetry, and became a published author. With a junior Hulme scholarship, he moved on in 1895 to study "Literae Humaniores" (the Oxonian term for "the Classics") at Brasenose College, Oxford, where his friends included Hilaire Belloc, Raymond Asquith, and Aubrey Herbert. Buchan won both the Stanhope essay prize, in 1897, and the Newdigate Prize for poetry the following year, as well as being elected as the president of the Oxford Union and having six of his works published. It was at around the time of his graduation from Oxford that Buchan had his first portrait painted, done in 1900 by a young Sholto Johnstone Douglas.
Life as an author and politician.
Buchan entered into a career in diplomacy and government after graduating from Oxford, becoming in 1901 the private secretary to Alfred Milner, who was then the High Commissioner for Southern Africa, Governor of Cape Colony, and colonial administrator of Transvaal and the Orange Free State, putting Buchan in what came to be known as Milner's Kindergarten. He also gained an acquaintance with a country that would feature prominently in his writing, which he resumed upon his return to London, at the same time entering into a partnership in the Thomas Nelson & Son publishing company and becoming editor of "The Spectator". Buchan also read for and was called to the bar in the same year, though he did not practise as a lawyer, and on 15 July 1907 married Susan Charlotte Grosvenor—daughter of Norman Grosvenor and a cousin of the Duke of Westminster. Together, Buchan and his wife had four children, Alice, John, William, and Alastair, two of whom would spend most of their lives in Canada.
In 1910, Buchan wrote "Prester John", the first of his adventure novels set in South Africa, and the following year he suffered from duodenal ulcers, a condition that later afflicted one of his fictional characters. At the same time, Buchan ventured into the political arena, and was adopted as Unionist candidate in March 1911 for the Borders seat of Peebles and Selkirk; he supported free trade, women's suffrage, national insurance, and curtailing the powers of the House of Lords, though he did also oppose the welfare reforms of the Liberal Party, and what he considered to be the "class hatred" fostered by demagogic Liberals such as David Lloyd George.
With the outbreak of the First World War, Buchan went to write for the British War Propaganda Bureau and worked as a correspondent in France for "The Times". He continued to write fiction, and in 1915 published his most famous work, "The Thirty-Nine Steps", a spy-thriller set just prior to World War I. The novel featured Buchan's oft used hero, Richard Hannay, whose character was based on Edmund Ironside, a friend of Buchan from his days in South Africa. A sequel, "Greenmantle", came the following year. Buchan then enlisted in the British Army and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Intelligence Corps, where he wrote speeches and communiqués for Sir Douglas Haig. Recognised for his abilities, Buchan was appointed as the Director of Information in 1917, under Lord Beaverbrook—which Buchan said was "the toughest job I ever took on"—and also assisted Charles Masterman in publishing a monthly magazine that detailed the history of the war, the first edition appearing in February 1915 (and later published in 24 volumes as "Nelson's History of the War"). It was difficult, given his close connections to many of Britain's military leaders, for Buchan to be critical of the British Army's conduct during the conflict.
Following the close of the war, Buchan turned his attention to writing on historical subjects, along with his usual thrillers and novels. By the mid-1920s, he was living in Elsfield and had become president of the Scottish Historical Society and a trustee of the National Library of Scotland, and he also maintained ties with various universities. Robert Graves, who lived in nearby Islip, mentioned his being recommended by Buchan for a lecturing position at the newly founded Cairo University and, in a 1927 by-election, Buchan was elected as the Unionist Party Member of Parliament for the Combined Scottish Universities. Politically, he was of the Unionist-Nationalist tradition, believing in Scotland's promotion as a nation within the British Empire. Buchan remarked in a speech to parliament: "I believe every Scotsman should be a Scottish nationalist. If it could be proved that a Scottish parliament were desirable ... Scotsmen should support it." The effects of the Great Depression in Scotland, and the subsequent high emigration from that country, also led Buchan to reflect in the same speech: "We do not want to be like the Greeks, powerful and prosperous wherever we settle, but with a dead Greece behind us," and he found himself profoundly affected by John Morley's "Life of Gladstone", which Buchan read in the early months of the Second World War. He believed that Gladstone had taught people to combat materialism, complacency, and authoritarianism; Buchan later wrote to Herbert Fisher, Stair Gillon, and Gilbert Murray that he was "becoming a Gladstonian Liberal."
After the United Free Church of Scotland joined in 1929 with the Church of Scotland, Buchan remained an active elder of St. Columba's Church in London, as well as of the Oxford Presbyterian parish. In 1933 and 1934 Buchan was further appointed as the King George V's Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. Beginning in 1930 Buchan aligned himself with Zionism and the related Palestine All Party Parliamentary Group. (Despite this, Buchan was later described by Anthony Storr as being "overtly antisemitic", though he has been defended by others such as Roger Kimball, who stated that Buchan's anti-Semitism was merely representative of society at that time and that Buchan denounced Hitler's anti-Semitic policies in 1934.) In recognition of his contributions to literature and education, on 1 January 1932, Buchan was granted the personal gift of the sovereign of induction into the Order of the Companions of Honour.
In 1935 Buchan's literary work was adapted to the cinematic theatre with the completion of Alfred Hitchcock's "The 39 Steps", starring Robert Donat as Richard Hannay, though with Buchan's story much altered. This came in the same year that Buchan was honoured with appointment to the Order of St. Michael and St. George on 23 May, as well as being elevated to the peerage, when he was entitled by King George V as Baron Tweedsmuir, of Elsfield in the County of Oxford on 1 June. This had been done in preparation for Buchan's appointment as Canada's governor general; when consulted by Canadian prime minister R. B. Bennett about the appointment, the Leader of His Majesty's Loyal Opposition, William Lyon Mackenzie King, recommended that the King allow Buchan to serve as viceroy as a commoner, but George V insisted that he be represented by a peer.
Buchan's name had been earlier put forward by Mackenzie King to George V as a candidate for the governor generalcy: Buchan and his wife had been guests of Mackenzie King's at his estate, Kingsmere, in 1924 and Mackenzie King, who at that time was prime minister, was impressed with Buchan, stating, "I know no man I would rather have as a friend, a beautiful, noble soul, kindly & generous in thought & word & act, informed as few men in this world have ever been, modest, humble, true, man after God's own heart." One evening in the following year, the Prime Minister mentioned to Governor General the Lord Byng of Vimy that Buchan would be a suitable successor to Byng, with which the Governor General agreed, the two being friends. Word of this reached the British Cabinet, and Buchan was approached, but he was reluctant to take the posting; Byng had been writing to Buchan about the constitutional dispute that took place in June 1926 and spoke disparagingly of Mackenzie King.
Governor General of Canada.
It was announced in the Canadian parliament on 27 March 1935 that the King "has been graciously pleased to approve the appointment of Mr. John Buchan" as the viceregal representative. Acting Prime Minister Sir George Halsey Perley made the announcement in the place of the ailing Bennett, who recommended Buchan's name to King George V. The King approved the appointment, made by commission under the royal sign-manual and signet. Buchan then departed for Canada and was sworn in as the country's governor general in a ceremony on 2 November 1935 in the "salon rouge" of the parliament buildings of Quebec. By the time Buchan arrived in Canada, William Lyon Mackenzie King had been sworn in as prime minister after the Liberal Party won the federal election held the previous month. Buchan was the first viceroy of Canada appointed since the enactment of the Statute of Westminster on 11 December 1931 and was thus the first to have been decided on solely by the monarch of Canada in his Canadian council.
He brought to the post a longstanding knowledge of Canada. He had written many appreciative words about the country as a journalist on "The Spectator" and had followed the actions of the Canadian forces in World War I when writing his "Nelson History of the War", helped by talks with Julian Byng, before first visiting Canada in 1924. His knowledge and interest in increasing public awareness and accessibility to Canada's past resulted in Buchan being made the Champlain Society's second honorary president between 1938 and 1939. Buchan continued writing during his time as governor general, but he also took his position as viceroy seriously and from the outset made it his goal to travel the length and breadth of Canada, as one way to promote Canadian unity. including, to the Arctic regions; he said of his job: "a Governor General is in a unique position for it is his duty to know the whole of Canada and all the various types of her people." Buchan also encouraged a distinct Canadian identity and national unity, despite the ongoing Great Depression and the difficulty which it caused for the population. Not all Canadians shared Buchan's views; he raised the ire of imperialists when he said in Montreal in 1937: "a Canadian's first loyalty is not to the British Commonwealth of Nations, but to Canada and Canada's King," a statement that the "Montreal Gazette" dubbed as "disloyal." Buchan maintained and recited his idea that ethnic groups "should retain their individuality and each make its contribution to the national character," and "the strongest nations are those that are made up of different racial elements."
The following year proved to be a tumultuous one for the monarchy that Buchan represented. In late January, George V died, and his eldest son, the popular Prince Edward, succeeded to the throne as Edward VIII, while Rideau Hall—the royal and viceroyal residence in Ottawa—was decked in black crepe and all formal entertaining was cancelled during the official period of mourning. As the year unfolded, it became evident that the new king planned to marry American divorcée Wallis Simpson, which caused much discontent throughout the Dominions. Buchan conveyed to Buckingham Palace and British prime minister Stanley Baldwin Canadians' deep affection for the King, but also the outrage to Canadian religious feelings, both Catholic and Protestant, that would occur if Edward married Simpson. By 11 December, King Edward had abdicated in favour of his younger brother, Prince Albert, Duke of York, who was thereafter known as George VI. In order for the line of succession for Canada to remain parallel to those of the other Dominions, Buchan, as Governor-in-Council, gave the government's consent to the British legislation formalising the abdication, and ratified this with finality when he granted Royal Assent to the Canadian Succession to the Throne Act in 1937 . Upon receiving news from Mackenzie King of Edward's decision to abdicate, Tweedsmuir commented that, in his year in Canada as governor general, he had represented three kings.
In May and June 1939, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth toured the country from coast to coast and paid a state visit to the United States. The royal tour had been conceived by Buchan before the coronation in 1937; according to the official event historian, Gustave Lanctot, the idea "probably grew out of the knowledge that at his coming Coronation, George VI was to assume the additional title of King of Canada," and Buchan desired to demonstrate with living example—through Canadians seeing "their King performing royal functions, supported by his Canadian ministers"—the fact of Canada's status as an independent kingdom. Buchan put great effort into securing a positive response to the invitation sent to King George in May 1937; after more than a year without a reply, in June 1938 Buchan headed to the United Kingdom for a personal holiday, but also to procure a decision on the possible royal tour. From his home near Oxford, Buchan wrote to Mackenzie King: "The important question for me is, of course, the King's visit to Canada." After a period of convalescence at Ruthin Castle, Buchan, in October, sailed back to Canada with a secured commitment that the royal couple would tour the country. Though he had been a significant contributor to the organisation of the trip, Buchan retired to Rideau Hall for the duration of the royal tour; Buchan expressed the view that while the king of Canada was present, "I cease to exist as Viceroy, and retain only a shadowy legal existence as Governor-General in Council." In Canada itself, the royal couple took part in public events such as the opening of the Lions Gate Bridge in May 1939. The King appointed Tweedsmuir a Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order while on the royal train, between Truro and Bedford, Nova Scotia.
Another factor behind the tour was public relations: the presence of the royal couple in Canada and the United States, was calculated to shore up sympathy for Britain in anticipation of hostilities with Nazi Germany. Buchan's experiences during the First World War made him averse to conflict, he tried to help prevent another war in coordination with United States president Franklin D. Roosevelt and Mackenzie King. Still, Buchan authorised Canada's declaration of war against Germany in September, shortly after the British declaration of war and with the consent of King George; and, thereafter, issued orders of deployment for Canadian soldiers, airmen, and seamen as the titular commander-in-chief of the Canadian armed forces.
These duties would not burden Buchan for long. On 6 February 1940, he suffered a severe head injury when he fell after suffering a stroke at Rideau Hall. Two surgeries by Doctor Wilder Penfield of the Montreal Neurological Institute were insufficient to save him, and his death on 11 February drew a radio eulogy by Mackenzie King: "In the passing of His Excellency, the people of Canada have lost one of the greatest and most revered of their Governors General, and a friend who, from the day of his arrival in this country, dedicated his life to their service." The Governor General had formed a strong bond with his prime minister, even if it may have been built more on political admiration than friendship: Mackenzie King appreciated Buchan's "sterling rectitude and disinterested purpose."
After lying in state in the Senate chamber on Parliament Hill, Buchan was given a state funeral at St. Andrew's Presbyterian Church in Ottawa. His ashes were returned to the UK aboard the cruiser HMS "Orion" for final burial at Elsfield, his estate in Oxfordshire.
Legacy.
In his last years, Buchan, amongst other works, wrote an autobiography, "Memory Hold-the-Door", as well as works on the history and his views of Canada. He and Baroness Tweedsmuir together established the first proper library at Rideau Hall, and, with his wife's encouragement, Buchan founded the Governor General's Literary Awards, which remain Canada's premier award for literature. Two of his grandchildren, James and Perdita Buchan, also became writers.
Buchan's 100 works include nearly thirty novels, seven collections of short stories, and biographies of Sir Walter Scott, Caesar Augustus, and Oliver Cromwell. Buchan was awarded the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for his biography of the Marquess of Montrose, but the most famous of his books were the spy thrillers, and it is for these that he is now best remembered. The "last Buchan" (as Graham Greene entitled his appreciative review) was the 1941 novel "Sick Heart River" (American title: "Mountain Meadow"), in which a dying protagonist confronts the questions of the meaning of life in the Canadian wilderness. The insightful quotation, "It's a great life, if you don't weaken," is famously attributed to Buchan, as is, "No great cause is ever lost or won, The battle must always be renewed, And the creed must always be restated."
Tweedsmuir Provincial Park in British Columbia, now divided into Tweedsmuir South Provincial Park and Tweedsmuir North Provincial Park and Protected Area, was created in 1938 to commemorate Buchan's 1937 visit to the Rainbow Range and other nearby areas by horseback and floatplane. In the foreword to a booklet published to commemorate his visit, he wrote, "I have now travelled over most of Canada and have seen many wonderful things, but I have seen nothing more beautiful and more wonderful than the great park which British Columbia has done me the honour to call by my name".

</doc>
<doc id="84936" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84936" title="Blood–brain barrier">
Blood–brain barrier

The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is a highly selective permeability barrier that separates the circulating blood from the brain extracellular fluid in the central nervous system (CNS). The blood–brain barrier is formed by brain endothelial cells, which are connected by tight junctions with an extremely high electrical resistivity of at least 0.1 Ω⋅m. The blood–brain barrier allows the passage of water, some gases, and lipid-soluble molecules by passive diffusion, as well as the selective transport of molecules such as glucose and amino acids that are crucial to neural function. On the other hand, the blood–brain barrier may prevent the entry of lipophilic, potential neurotoxins by way of an active transport mechanism mediated by P-glycoprotein. Astrocytes are necessary to create the blood–brain barrier. A small number of regions in the brain, including the circumventricular organs (CVOs), do not have a blood–brain barrier.
The blood–brain barrier occurs along all capillaries and consists of tight junctions around the capillaries that do not exist in normal circulation. Endothelial cells restrict the diffusion of microscopic objects (e.g., bacteria) and large or hydrophilic molecules into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), while allowing the diffusion of small or hydrophobic molecules (O2, CO2, hormones). Cells of the barrier actively transport metabolic products such as glucose across the barrier with specific proteins. This barrier also includes a thick basement membrane and astrocytic endfeet.
Structure.
This "barrier" results from the selectivity of the tight junctions between endothelial cells in CNS vessels that restricts the passage of solutes. At the interface between blood and the brain, endothelial cells are stitched together by these tight junctions, which are composed of smaller subunits, frequently biochemical dimers, that are transmembrane proteins such as occludin, claudins, junctional adhesion molecule (JAM), or ESAM, for example. Each of these transmembrane proteins is anchored into the endothelial cells by another protein complex that includes zo-1 and associated proteins.
The blood–brain barrier is composed of high-density cells restricting passage of substances from the bloodstream much more than do the endothelial cells in capillaries elsewhere in the body. Astrocyte cell projections called astrocytic feet (also known as "glia limitans") surround the endothelial cells of the BBB, providing biochemical support to those cells. The BBB is distinct from the quite similar blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier, which is a function of the choroidal cells of the choroid plexus, and from the blood–retinal barrier, which can be considered a part of the whole realm of such barriers.
Several areas of the human brain are not on the brain side of the BBB. Some examples of this include the circumventricular organs, the roof of the third and fourth ventricles, capillaries in the pineal gland on the roof of the diencephalon and the pineal gland. The pineal gland secretes the hormone melatonin "directly into the systemic circulation", thus melatonin is not affected by the blood–brain barrier.
Development.
Originally, experiments in the 1920s seemed to show that the blood–brain barrier (BBB) was still immature in newborns. The reason for this mistake was an error in methodology (the osmotic pressure was too high and the delicate embryonal capillary vessels were partially damaged). It was later shown in experiments with a reduced volume of the injected liquids that the markers under investigation could not pass the BBB. It was reported that those natural substances such as albumin, α-1-fetoprotein or transferrin with elevated plasma concentration in the newborn could not be detected outside of cells in the brain. The transporter P-glycoprotein exists already in the embryonal endothelium.
The measurement of brain uptake of acetamide, antipyrine, benzyl alcohol, butanol, caffeine, cytosine, phenytoin, ethanol, ethylene glycol, heroin, mannitol, methanol, phenobarbital, propylene glycol, thiourea, and urea in ether-anesthetized newborns vs. adult rabbits shows that newborn rabbit and adult rabbit brain endothelia are functionally similar with respect to lipid-mediated permeability. These data confirmed no differences in permeability could be detected between newborn and adult BBB capillaries. No difference in brain uptake of glucose, amino acids, organic acids, purines, nucleosides, or choline was observed between adult and newborn rabbits. These experiments indicate that the newborn BBB has restrictive properties similar to that of the adult. In contrast to suggestions of an immature barrier in young animals, these studies indicate that a sophisticated, selective BBB is operative at birth.
Function.
The blood–brain barrier acts very effectively to protect the brain from most pathogens. Thus, infections of the brain are very rare. Infections of the brain that do occur are often very serious and difficult to treat. Antibodies are too large to cross the blood–brain barrier, and only certain antibiotics are able to pass. In some cases, a drug has to be administered directly into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), where it can enter the brain by crossing the blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier. However, not all drugs that are delivered directly to the CSF can effectively penetrate the CSF barrier and enter the brain. The blood–brain barrier becomes more permeable during inflammation. This allows some antibiotics and phagocytes to move across the BBB. However, this also allows bacteria and viruses to infiltrate the BBB. Examples of pathogens that can traverse the BBB and the diseases they cause include "toxoplasma gondii" which causes toxoplasmosis, spirochetes like "Borrelia" which causes Lyme disease, Group B streptococci which causes meningitis in newborns, and "Treponema pallidum" which causes syphilis. Some of these harmful bacteria gain access by releasing cytotoxins like pneumolysin which have a direct toxic effect on brain microvascular endothelium and tight junctions.
There are also some biochemical poisons that are made up of large molecules that are too big to pass through the blood–brain barrier. This was especially important in more primitive times when people often ate contaminated food. Neurotoxins such as botulinum in the food might affect peripheral nerves, but the blood–brain barrier can often prevent such toxins from reaching the central nervous system, where they could cause serious or fatal damage.
Clinical significance.
As a drug target.
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is formed by the brain capillary endothelium and excludes from the brain ∼100% of large-molecule neurotherapeutics and more than 98% of all small-molecule drugs. Overcoming the difficulty of delivering therapeutic agents to specific regions of the brain presents a major challenge to treatment of most brain disorders. In its neuroprotective role, the blood–brain barrier functions to hinder the delivery of many potentially important diagnostic and therapeutic agents to the brain. Therapeutic molecules and antibodies that might otherwise be effective in diagnosis and therapy do not cross the BBB in adequate amounts.
Mechanisms for drug targeting in the brain involve going either "through" or "behind" the BBB. Modalities for drug delivery/Dosage form through the BBB entail its disruption by osmotic means; biochemically by the use of vasoactive substances such as bradykinin; or even by localized exposure to high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU). Other methods used to get through the BBB may entail the use of endogenous transport systems, including carrier-mediated transporters such as glucose and amino acid carriers; receptor-mediated transcytosis for insulin or transferrin; and the blocking of active efflux transporters such as p-glycoprotein. However, vectors targeting BBB transporters, such as the transferrin receptor, have been found to remain entrapped in brain endothelial cells of capillaries, instead of being ferried across the BBB into the cerebral parenchyma. Methods for drug delivery behind the BBB include intracerebral implantation (such as with needles) and convection-enhanced distribution. Mannitol can be used in bypassing the BBB.
Nanoparticles.
Nanotechnology may also help in the transfer of drugs across the BBB. Recently, researchers have been trying to build liposomes loaded with nanoparticles to gain access through the BBB. More research is needed to determine which strategies will be most effective and how they can be improved for patients with brain tumors. The potential for using BBB opening to target specific agents to brain tumors has just begun to be explored.
Delivering drugs across the blood–brain barrier is one of the most promising applications of nanotechnology in clinical neuroscience. Nanoparticles could potentially carry out multiple tasks in a predefined sequence, which is very important in the delivery of drugs across the blood–brain barrier.
A significant amount of research in this area has been spent exploring methods of nanoparticle-mediated delivery of antineoplastic drugs to tumors in the central nervous system. For example, radiolabeled polyethylene glycol coated hexadecylcyanoacrylate nanospheres targeted and accumulated in a rat gliosarcoma. However, this method is not yet ready for clinical trials, due to the accumulation of the nanospheres in surrounding healthy tissue. Another, more promising approach, is the coating of polyalkylcyanoacrylate or poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) nanoparticles with polysorbate 80 or poloxamer 188. Due to this coating the particles adsorb apolipoproteins E or A-1 from the blood and thus interact with the LRP1 or with the scavenger receptor followed by transcytosis across the blood-brain barrier into the brain. These particles loaded with doxorubicin for the treatment of glioblastomas are presently in Clinical Phase I. Recently, a novel class of multifunctional nanoparticles known as magneto-electric nanoparticles (MENs) has been discovered for externally controlled targeted delivery and release of drug(s) across BBB as well as wireless stimulation of cells deep in the brain. This approach depends more on the field control and less on the cellular microenvironment. In vitro and in vivo (on mice) experiments to prove the feasibility of using MENs to release a drug across BBB on demand and wirelessly stimulate the brain have been conducted by the research group of Prof. Sakhrat Khizroev at Florida International University (FIU).
It should be noted that vascular endothelial cells and associated pericytes are often abnormal in tumors and that the blood–brain barrier may not always be intact in brain tumors. Also, the basement membrane is sometimes incomplete. Other factors, such as astrocytes, may contribute to the resistance of brain tumors to therapy.
Peptides.
Peptides are able to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) through various mechanisms, opening new diagnostic and therapeutic avenues. However, their BBB transport data are scattered in the literature over different disciplines, using different methodologies reporting different influx or efflux aspects. Therefore, a comprehensive BBB peptide database (Brainpeps) was constructed to collect the BBB data available in the literature. Brainpeps currently contains BBB transport information with positive as well as negative results. The database is a useful tool to prioritize peptide choices for evaluating different BBB responses or studying quantitative structure-property (BBB behaviour) relationships of peptides. Because a multitude of methods have been used to assess the BBB behaviour of compounds, we classified these methods and their responses. Moreover, the relationships between the different BBB transport methods have been clarified and visualized.
Casomorphin is a heptapeptide and could be able to pass the BBB.
Disease.
Meningitis.
Meningitis is an inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain and spinal cord (these membranes are known as meninges). Meningitis is most commonly caused by infections with various pathogens, examples of which are "Streptococcus pneumoniae " and "Haemophilus influenzae". When the meninges are inflamed, the blood–brain barrier may be disrupted. This disruption may increase the penetration of various substances (including either toxins or antibiotics) into the brain. Antibiotics used to treat meningitis may aggravate the inflammatory response of the central nervous system by releasing neurotoxins from the cell walls of bacteria - like lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Depending on the causative pathogen, whether it is bacterial, fungal, or protozoan, treatment with third-generation or fourth-generation cephalosporin or amphotericin B is usually prescribed.
Brain abscess.
A brain or cerebral abscess, like other abscesses, is caused by inflammation and collection of lymphatic cells and infected material originating from a local or remote infection. Brain abscess is a rare, life-threatening condition. Local sources may include infections of the ear, the oral cavity and teeth, the paranasal sinuses, or epidural abscess. Remote sources may include infections in the lung, heart or kidney. A brain abscess may also be caused by head trauma or as a complication of surgery. In children cerebral abscesses are usually linked to congenital heart disease. In most cases, 8–12 weeks of antibacterial therapy is required.
Epilepsy.
Epilepsy is a common neurological disease that is characterized by recurrent and sometimes untreatable seizures. Several clinical and experimental data have implicated the failure of blood–brain barrier function in triggering chronic or acute seizures. Some studies implicate the interactions between a common blood protein (albumin) and astrocytes. These findings suggest that acute seizures are a predictable consequence of disruption of the BBB by either artificial or inflammatory mechanisms. In addition, expression of drug resistance molecules and transporters at the BBB are a significant mechanism of resistance to commonly used anti-epileptic drugs.
Multiple sclerosis.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered to be an auto-immune and neurodegenerative disorder in which the immune system attacks the myelin that protects and electrically insulates the neurons of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Normally, a person's nervous system would be inaccessible to the white blood cells due to the blood–brain barrier. However, magnetic resonance imaging has shown that when a person is undergoing an MS "attack," the blood–brain barrier has broken down in a section of the brain or spinal cord, allowing white blood cells called T lymphocytes to cross over and attack the myelin. It has sometimes been suggested that, rather than being a disease of the immune system, MS is a disease of the blood–brain barrier. The weakening of the blood–brain barrier may be a result of a disturbance in the endothelial cells on the inside of the blood vessel, due to which the production of the protein P-glycoprotein is not working well.
There are currently active investigations into treatments for a compromised blood–brain barrier. It is believed that oxidative stress plays an important role into the breakdown of the barrier. Anti-oxidants such as lipoic acid may be able to stabilize a weakening blood–brain barrier.
Neuromyelitis optica.
Neuromyelitis optica, also known as Devic's disease, is similar to and is often confused with multiple sclerosis. Among other differences from MS, a different target of the autoimmune response has been identified. Patients with neuromyelitis optica have high levels of antibodies against a protein called aquaporin 4 (a component of the astrocytic foot processes in the blood–brain barrier).
Late-stage neurological trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness).
Late-stage neurological trypanosomiasis, or sleeping sickness, is a condition in which trypanosoma protozoa are found in brain tissue. It is not yet known how the parasites infect the brain from the blood, but it is suspected that they cross through the choroid plexus, a circumventricular organ.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that is caused by reactivation of a latent papovavirus (the JC polyomavirus) infection, that can cross the BBB. It affects immune-compromised patients and it is usually seen with patients suffering from AIDS.
De Vivo disease.
De Vivo disease (also known as GLUT1 deficiency syndrome) is a rare condition caused by inadequate transportation of the sugar glucose across the blood–brain barrier, resulting in developmental delays and other neurological problems. Genetic defects in glucose transporter type 1 (GLUT1) appears to be the primary cause of De Vivo disease.
Alzheimer's disease.
Some evidence indicates that disruption of the blood–brain barrier in Alzheimer's disease patients allows blood plasma containing amyloid beta (Aβ) to enter the brain where the Aβ adheres preferentially to the surface of astrocytes. These findings have led to the hypotheses that (1) breakdown of the blood–brain barrier allows access of neuron-binding autoantibodies and soluble exogenous Aβ42 to brain neurons and (2) binding of these auto-antibodies to neurons triggers and/or facilitates the internalization and accumulation of cell surface-bound Aβ42 in vulnerable neurons through their natural tendency to clear surface-bound autoantibodies via endocytosis. Eventually the astrocyte is overwhelmed, dies, ruptures, and disintegrates, leaving behind the insoluble Aβ42 plaque. Thus, in some patients, Alzheimer's disease may be caused (or more likely, aggravated) by a breakdown in the blood–brain barrier.
Cerebral edema.
Cerebral edema is the accumulation of excess water in the extracellular space of the brain, which can result when hypoxia causes the blood–brain barrier to open.
Prion and prion-like diseases.
Many neurodegenerative diseases including alpha-synucleinopathies (Parkinson's, PSP, DLBP)
and tauopathies (Alzheimer's) are thought to result from seeded misfolding from pathological
extracellular protein variants. This prion-like hypothesis is gaining support in numerous
studies in vitro and involving in vivo intracerebral injection of brain lysates, extracted
protein (tau, alpha-synuclein) and synthetically generated fibers (PFFs in alpha-synucleinopathies). These proteins are also detectable in increasing amounts in
the plasma of patients suffering from these conditions (particularly total alpha-synuclein
in Parkinson's disease patients). The extent to which and the mechanisms by which
these prion-like proteins can penetrate the blood–brain barrier is currently unknown.
HIV encephalitis.
It is believed that latent HIV can cross the blood–brain barrier inside circulating monocytes in the bloodstream ("Trojan horse theory") within the first 14 days of infection. Once inside, these monocytes become activated and are transformed into macrophages. Activated macrophages release virions into the brain tissue proximate to brain microvessels. These viral particles likely attract the attention of sentinel brain microglia and perivascular macrophages initiating an inflammatory cascade that may cause a series of intracellular signaling in brain microvascular endothelial cells and damage the functional and structural integrity of the BBB. This inflammation is HIV encephalitis (HIVE). Instances of HIVE probably occur throughout the course of AIDS and are a precursor for HIV-associated dementia (HAD). The premier model for studying HIV and HIVE is the simian model.
Rabies.
During lethal rabies infection of mice, the blood–brain barrier (BBB) does not allow anti-viral immune cells to enter the brain, the primary site of rabies virus replication. This aspect contributes to the pathogenicity of the virus and artificially increasing BBB permeability promotes viral clearance. Opening the BBB during rabies infection has been suggested as a possible novel approach to treating the disease, even though no attempts have yet been made to determine whether or not this treatment could be successful.
Systemic inflammation.
Inflammation in the body may lead to effects on the brain via the blood-brain barrier (BBB). During systemic inflammation, whether in the form of infection or sterile inflammation, the BBB may undergo changes which may be disruptive or non-disruptive. Such changes may be part of a productive host response to systemic inflammation, or may lead to deleterious consequences within the central nervous system. These BBB changes likely play a role in the generation of sickness behaviour during systemic infection (why we feel 'unwell' when we have an infection). These changes may also induce or accelerate disease within the brain, for example in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease, and may be part of the reason why patients with these conditions can deteriorate during an infection. Also, in patients with neurological disease the BBB may be abnormally sensitive to the effects of systemic inflammation.
History.
Paul Ehrlich was a bacteriologist studying staining, a procedure that is used in many microscopic studies to make fine biological structures visible using chemical dyes. As Ehrlich injected some of these dyes (notably the aniline dyes that were then widely used), the dye stained all of the organs of some kinds of animals except for their brains. At that time, Ehrlich attributed this lack of staining to the brain simply not picking up as much of the dye.
However, in a later experiment in 1913, Edwin Goldmann (one of Ehrlich's students) injected the dye into the cerebro-spinal fluids of animals' brains directly. He found that in this case the brains did become dyed, but the rest of the body did not. This clearly demonstrated the existence of some sort of compartmentalization between the two. At that time, it was thought that the blood vessels themselves were responsible for the barrier, since no obvious membrane could be found. The concept of the blood–brain barrier (then termed hematoencephalic barrier) was proposed by a Berlin physician, Lewandowsky, in 1900. It was not until the introduction of the scanning electron microscope to the medical research fields in the 1960s that the actual membrane could be observed and proved to exist.

</doc>
<doc id="84937" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84937" title="Bird-in-Hand, Pennsylvania">
Bird-in-Hand, Pennsylvania

"This article is about the place, not the Bird-in-Hand Hotel or the Bird-in-Hand Winery"
Bird-in-Hand, Pennsylvania is a census-designated place (CDP) in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States, with parts lying in East Lampeter and Upper Leacock Townships. The community has a large Amish and Mennonite population. As of the 2010 census, its population was 402.
History.
The area’s first inhabitants were Native American Shawnee and the Susquehannock.
The earliest settlers of what was to become Bird-in-Hand were Quakers and Swiss Mennonites. James Smith was the first of the Quakers known to have settled in the area, arriving by the year 1715. William and Dorothy McNabb were pioneer landowners and the owners of the original Bird-in-Hand Hotel. The Quakers built a meetinghouse and two-story academy, which stands today, next to the present day Bird-in-Hand fire company.
The community was founded in 1734. The legend of the naming of Bird-in-Hand concerns the time when the Old Philadelphia Pike was surveyed between Lancaster and Philadelphia. According to legend two road surveyors discussed whether they should stay at their present location or go on to the town of Lancaster. One of them supposedly said, "A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush," which means it is preferable to have a small but certain advantage than the mere potential of a greater one; and so they stayed. By 1734, road surveyors were making McNabb’s hotel their headquarters rather than returning to Lancaster every day. The sign in front of the inn is known to have once "portrayed a man with a bird in his hand and a bush nearby, in which two birds were perched," and was known as the Bird-in-Hand Inn. Variations of this sign appear throughout the town today.
In 1834 construction began on the 86-mile Pennsylvania Railroad line between Philadelphia and Columbia. Bird-in-Hand, featuring tanneries, feed mills, coal and lumber yards, was the most important stop on the Lancaster to Coatesville section.
In 1836 the village post office was established as the Enterprise Post Office, as the village was then officially called, until the name officially changed to Bird-in-Hand in 1873. 
The town remained relatively unknown until a musical called "Plain and Fancy" opened in New York in 1955. The play was set in the village of Bird-in-Hand and is often credited as a catalyst for the boom in Pennsylvania Dutch Country tourism in the mid-twentieth century. The Plain & Fancy Restaurant opened in 1960, and is the oldest "family-style restaurant" in the area. Bird-in-Hand is often named in lists of "delightfully-named towns" in Pennsylvania Dutchland, along with Intercourse, Blue Ball, Lititz, Bareville, Mount Joy and Paradise.
In 1968 the Smucker family opened a small 30-room motel called the Bird-in-Hand Motor Inn, with an adjacent coffee shop, in hopes of capitalizing on the growing tourist trade in the area. Over the years the small coffee shop grew into the larger Bird-in-Hand Family Restaurant and Smorgasbord.
In 1976 the Bird-in-Hand Farmers Market opened adjacent to the Bird-in-Hand Motor Inn.
The Bird-in-Hand Village Inn and Suites was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992.
The town is home to the Bank of Bird-in-Hand, the first bank in the United States to open following the passage of the Dodd Frank Act.
Economy.
Tourism is very important and many businesses cater specifically to tourists. Many of these businesses have an Amish theme, such as horse and buggy rides and crafts.

</doc>
<doc id="84938" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84938" title="The Thirty-Nine Steps">
The Thirty-Nine Steps

The Thirty-Nine Steps is an adventure novel by the Scottish author John Buchan. It first appeared as a serial in "Blackwood's Magazine" in August and September 1915 before being published in book form in October that year by William Blackwood and Sons, Edinburgh. It is the first of five novels featuring Richard Hannay, an all-action hero with a stiff upper lip and a miraculous knack for getting himself out of sticky situations.
The novel formed the basis for a number of film adaptations, notably: Alfred Hitchcock's 1935 version; a 1959 colour remake; a 1978 version which is perhaps most faithful to the novel; and a 2008 version for British television.
Background.
John Buchan wrote "The Thirty-Nine Steps" while he was ill in bed with a duodenal ulcer, an illness which remained with him all his life. The novel was his first "shocker", as he called it — a story combining personal and political dramas. The novel marked a turning point in Buchan's literary career and introduced his famous adventuring hero, Richard Hannay. He described a "shocker" as an adventure where the events in the story are unlikely and the reader is only just able to believe that they really happened.
Buchan's son, William, later wrote that the name of the book originated when the author's daughter was counting the stairs at a private nursing home in Broadstairs, where Buchan was convalescing. "There was a wooden staircase leading down to the beach. My sister, who was about six, and who had just learnt to count properly, went down them and gleefully announced: there are 39 steps." Some time later the house was demolished and a section of the stairs, complete with a brass plaque, was sent to Buchan. The mysterious phrase "Thirty-Nine Steps", first mentioned by the character Franklin Scudder, becomes the title of the novel and the solution to its meaning is a thread that runs through the whole story.
Plot summary.
The novel is set during May and June 1914; war was evident in Europe, Richard Hannay the protagonist and narrator, an expatriate Scot, returns to his new home, a flat in London, after a long stay in Rhodesia, in order to begin a new life. One night he is buttonholed by a stranger, a well-travelled American, who claims to be in fear for his life. The man appears to know of an anarchist plot to destabilise Europe, beginning with a plan to assassinate the Greek Premier, Constantine Karolides, during his forthcoming visit to London. The man reveals his name to be Franklin P. Scudder, a freelance spy, and remarks that he is dead, which holds Hannay's attention. Scudder explains that he has faked his own death in order to avert suspicion. Scudder claims to be following a ring of German spies called the Black Stone who are trying to steal British plans for the outbreak of war. Hannay lets Scudder hide in his flat, and sure enough the next day another man is discovered having apparently committed suicide in the same building. Four days later Hannay returns home to find Scudder dead with a knife through his heart.
Hannay fears that the murderers will come for him next, but cannot ask the police for help because he is the most likely suspect for the murders because he lived in the same building. Not only does he want to avoid imprisonment, but he also feels a duty to take up Scudder's cause and save Karolides from the assassination, planned in three weeks' time. He decides to go into hiding in Scotland and then to contact the authorities at the last minute. In order to escape from his flat unseen, he bribes the milkman into lending him his uniform and exits wearing it, escaping from the German spies watching the house. Carrying Scudder's pocket-book, he catches an express train leaving from London St. Pancras station. Hannay fixes upon Galloway, in south-west Scotland, as a suitably remote place in which to make his escape and remembers somehow the town of Newton-Stewart, which he names as his destination when he buys his ticket from the guard.
Arriving at a remote station somewhere in Galloway (apparently not Newton Stewart itself), Hannay lodges in a shepherd's cottage. The next morning he reads in a newspaper that the police are looking for him in Scotland. Reasoning that the police would expect him to head for a port on the West Coast, he doubles back and boards a local train heading east, but jumps off between stations. He is seen but escapes, finding an inn where he stays the night. He tells the innkeeper a modified version of his story, and the man is persuaded to shelter him. While staying at the inn, Hannay cracks the substitution cipher used in Scudder's pocket-sized book. The next day two men arrive at the inn looking for Hannay, but the innkeeper sends them away. When they return later, Hannay steals their car and escapes.
On his way, Hannay reflects on what he has learnt from Scudder's notes. They contradict the story that Scudder first told to him, and mention an enemy group called the "Black Stone" and the mysterious "Thirty-nine Steps". The United Kingdom appears to be in danger of an invasion by Germany and its allies. By this time, Hannay is being pursued by an aeroplane, and a policeman in a remote village has tried to stop him. Trying to avoid an oncoming car, Hannay crashes his own, but the other driver offers to take him home. The man is Sir Harry, a local landowner and prospective politician, although politically very naïve. When he learns of Hannay's experiences in South Africa, he invites him to address an election meeting that afternoon. Hannay's speech impresses Sir Harry, and Hannay feels able to trust him with his story. Sir Harry writes an introductory letter about Hannay to a relation in the Foreign Office.
Hannay leaves Sir Harry and tries to hide in the countryside, but is spotted by the aeroplane. Soon he spots a group of men on the ground searching for him. Miraculously, he meets a road mender out on the moor, and swaps places with him, sending the workman home. His disguise fools his pursuers, who pass him by. On the same road he meets, in a passing touring car, a Society sycophant whom he recognizes from London and whom he forces to exchange clothes with him and drive him off the moor.
The next day, Hannay manages to stay ahead of the pursuers, and hides in a cottage occupied by an elderly man. Unfortunately, the man turns out to be one of the enemy, and with his accomplices he locks Hannay into his storage room. Fortunately, the room in which Hannay is locked is full of bomb-making materials, which he uses to break out of the cottage, injuring himself in the process.
A day later, Hannay retrieves his possessions from the helpful road mender and stays for a few days to recover from the explosion. He dines at a Public House in Moffat before walking to the junction at Beattock to catch a southbound train to England, changing at Crewe, Birmingham New Street and Reading, to meet Sir Harry's relative at the Foreign Office, Sir Walter Bullivant, at his country home in Berkshire. As they discuss Scudder's notes, Sir Walter receives a phone call to tell him that Karolides has been assassinated. 
Sir Walter, now at his house in London, lets Hannay in on some military secrets before releasing him to go home. Hannay is unable to shake off his sense of involvement in important events, and returns to Sir Walter's house where a high-level meeting is in progress. As one of the men, ostensibly the First Sea Lord, leaves the meeting, Hannay recognizes him as one of his former pursuers in Scotland. Hannay warns Sir Walter and the other officials that the man was an impostor, and they realise the spy is about to return to Europe with the information he has obtained from their meeting. At that point, Hannay realises that the phrase "the thirty-nine steps" could refer to the landing-point in England from which the spy is about to set sail. Throughout the night, Hannay and the British military leaders try to work out the meaning of the mysterious phrase.
After some reasoning worthy of Sherlock Holmes, and with the help of a knowledgeable coastguard, the group decide on a coastal town in Kent. They find a path down from the cliff that has thirty-nine steps. Just offshore they see a yacht. Posing as fishermen, some of the party visit the yacht, the "Ariadne", and find that at least one of the crew appears to be German. The only people onshore are playing tennis by a villa and appear to be English, but they match Scudder's description of the conspirators, The Black Stone. Hannay, alone, confronts the men at the villa. After a struggle, two of the men are captured while the third flees to the yacht, which meanwhile has been seized by the British authorities. The plot is thwarted, and the United Kingdom enters the First World War, having kept its military secrets from the enemy.
On the outbreak of war, Hannay joins the New Army and is immediately commissioned captain.
Literary significance and criticism.
"The Thirty-Nine Steps" is one of the earliest examples of the 'man-on-the-run' thriller archetype subsequently adopted by Hollywood as an often-used plot device. In "The Thirty-Nine Steps", Buchan holds up Richard Hannay as an example to his readers of an ordinary man who puts his country’s interests before his own safety. The story was a great success with the men in the First World War trenches. One soldier wrote to Buchan, "The story is greatly appreciated in the midst of mud and rain and shells, and all that could make trench life depressing."
Richard Hannay continued his adventures in four subsequent books. Two were set during the war when Hannay continued his undercover work against the Germans and their allies the Turks in "Greenmantle" and "Mr Standfast". The other two stories, "The Three Hostages" and "The Island of Sheep" were set in the post war period when Hannay's opponents were criminal gangs.
Radio, film, TV or theatrical adaptations.
There have been several film versions of the book; all depart substantially from the text, for example, by introducing a love interest absent from the original novel. For the films, the title is often abbreviated to "The 39 Steps", but the full title is more commonly used for the book and for the 1978 adaptation.
Radio.
On 1 August 1939, Orson Welles starred in a radio adaptation of the novel on "The Mercury Theatre on the Air" .
Glenn Ford starred in an adaptation on the 23 March 1948, broadcast of "Studio One" with Everett Sloane, Mercedes McCambridge and Kathleen Cordell.
Herbert Marshall starred in a radio adaptation on the 3 March 1952, broadcast of "Suspense".
The BBC has broadcast four different adaptations: the first was a six-part drama in 1939 starring Jack Livesey as Hannay; in 1960 another six-part drama was aired with James Mckechnie as Hannay; a 90-minute version starring David Rintoul as Hannay, directed by Patrick Rayner, aired 28 December, 1989; and a two-part adaptation on BBC Radio 4 in March 2001, starring David Robb as Hannay with Tom Baker as Sir Walter Bullivant, was adapted by Bert Coules.
1935.
The 1935 black and white film adaptation directed by Alfred Hitchcock departs substantially from the book. It stars Robert Donat as Hannay and Madeleine Carroll as the woman he meets on the train. It is regarded by critics as the superior film version. This was the first Hitchcock film based upon the idea of an "innocent man on the run," such as "Saboteur" and "North by Northwest." Scholars of his films regard this film as one of his best variations upon this particular theme. In 1999 it came 4th in a BFI poll of British films and in 2004 "Total Film" named it the 21st greatest British film of all time.
1959.
The 1959 film directed by Ralph Thomas was the first colour version, starring Kenneth More as Hannay and Taina Elg as Miss Fisher. The film is closely based on Hitchcock's adaptation, including the music-hall finale with "Mr Memory" and Hannay's escape from a train on the Forth Bridge, scenes not present in the book. It features a musical score by Clifton Parker.
1978.
The 1978 version was directed by Don Sharp and starred Robert Powell as Hannay, Karen Dotrice as Alex, John Mills as Colonel Scudder and a host of other well-known British actors in smaller parts. It is generally regarded as the closest to the book, being set at the same time as the novel was, pre-Great War, but still bears little resemblance to Buchan's original story. It is well remembered for its climax (bearing no relation to the novel's denouement), which sees Hannay hanging from the hands of Big Ben. The film was followed by a spin-off television series, "Hannay", starring Powell, featuring adventures occurring prior to the events in "The Thirty Nine Steps".
1995, 2005.
A comic theatrical adaptation by Simon Corble and Nobby Dimon for a cast of four actors premiered in 1995 at the Georgian Theatre Royal in Richmond, North Yorkshire, before embarking on a tour of village halls across the north of England. In 2005 Patrick Barlow rewrote the script, keeping the scenes, staging and small-scale feel, and in June 2005 this re-adaption premiered at the West Yorkshire Playhouse, The play then opened in London's Tricycle Theatre, and after a successful run transferred to the Criterion Theatre in Piccadilly where it is still running as of August 2015. Although drawing on Buchan's novel, it is strongly influenced by Hitchcock's 1935 film adaptation. On 15 January 2008, the show made its US Broadway premiere at the American Airlines Theatre; it transferred to the Cort Theatre on 29 April 2008 and then moved to the Helen Hayes Theatre on 21 January 2009, where it ended its run on 10 January 2010. It reopened on Stage One of New York's Off-Broadway venue New World Stages on 25 March 2010 and closed on 15 April 2010. The Broadway production received six Tony Award nominations, winning two—Best Lighting Design and Best Sound Design with the London show winning an Olivier in 2007 and two Tony Awards in 2008. The play also won the Drama Desk Award, Unique Theatrical Experience.
2008.
The BBC commissioned a new television adaptation of the novel, scripted by Lizzie Mickery and produced by BBC Scotland's drama unit. The 90 minute film stars Rupert Penry-Jones as Richard Hannay and was broadcast on 28 December 2008 A romantic subplot was added to the story, featuring Lydia Leonard. The storyline only very tenuously follows that of the book, many characters being renamed, or omitted altogether. The film ends with a scene involving a submarine in a Scottish loch, rather than the original setting off the Kent coast, and the apparent death of one character.
Also, in 2008, Penguin Books adapted the story as interactive fiction under the authorship of Charles Cumming calling it "The 21 Steps".
Video game.
A digital adaptation of Buchan's book, created with Unity, was created by Scottish developer the Story Mechanics and released on 25 April 2013, for Windows, OS X, Linux and iPad.
The real thirty-nine steps.
Buchan wrote the book while he was recuperating from illness at a house called St Cuby, Cliff Promenade, Broadstairs. As mentioned in the Background section, the original steps were demolished, and a part of them were sent to Buchan. They were replaced by concrete, and this set of steps still runs from the garden to the beach.

</doc>
<doc id="84939" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84939" title="Covered bridge">
Covered bridge

A covered bridge is a timber-truss bridge with a roof and siding which, in most covered bridges, create an almost complete enclosure. The purpose of the covering is to protect the wooden structural members from the weather. Uncovered wooden bridges have a lifespan of only 10 to 15 years because of the effects of rain and sun.
Bridges having covers for reasons other than protecting wood trusses, such as for protecting pedestrians and keeping horses from shying away from water, are also sometimes called covered bridges.
History and development.
Early timber covered bridges consisted of horizontal beams laid on top of piles driven into the riverbed below. However, this construction method meant that the length between bridge spans was limited by the maximum length of each beam. The development of the timber truss circumvented that limitation and allowed bridges to span greater distances than those with beam-only structures or arch structures, whether of stone, masonry, or timber.
Early European truss bridges used king post and queen post configurations. Some early German bridges included diagonal panel bracing in trusses with parallel top and bottom chords. To solve the problem of deterioration of the wood upon exposure to weather, various forms of covering came to be employed.
At least two covered bridges make the claim of being the first built in the United States. Town records for Swanzey, New Hampshire, indicate their Carleton Bridge was built in 1789, but this remains unverified. Philadelphia, however, claims a bridge built in the early 1800s on 30th Street and over the Schuylkill River was the first, noting that investors wanted it covered to extend its life. Beginning around 1820, new designs were developed, such as the Burr, Lattice, and Brown trusses.
In the mid-1800s, the development of cheaper wrought iron and cast iron led to metal rather than timber trusses, except in those areas of plentiful large timber.
Examples of covered bridges.
There are about 1600 covered bridges in the world.
North America.
Canada.
The Hartland Bridge in New Brunswick is the longest covered bridge in the world. In 1900 Quebec, New Brunswick, and Ontario had an estimated 1000, 400, and five covered bridges respectively. By the 1990s there were 98 in Quebec, 62 in New Brunswick, and one in Ontario, the West Montrose Covered Bridge.
United States.
According to "Covered Bridges Today" by Brenda Krekler, as many as 12,000 covered bridges once existed in the United States; that number dropped to under 1,500 by the 1950s. The National Society for the Preservation of Covered Bridges was formed in 1950.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) encourages the preservation of covered bridges with its Covered Bridge Manual.
Today, covered bridges exist in several states:
Other bridges that are covered.
The term covered bridge is also use to describe any bridge-like structure that is covered. For example:
Covered bridges in fiction.
Covered bridges are popular in folklore and fiction.
North American covered bridges received much recognition as a result of the success of the 1992 novel, "The Bridges of Madison County" written by Robert James Waller and made into a Hollywood motion picture starring Meryl Streep and Clint Eastwood. The Roseman Covered Bridge from 1883 in Iowa became famous when it was featured in both the novel and the film. A covered bridge is also prominently featured in the story "Never Bet the Devil Your Head" by Edgar Allan Poe, and covered bridges serve as plot points in the 1988 comedy films "Beetlejuice" and "Funny Farm".

</doc>
<doc id="84941" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84941" title="Di indigetes">
Di indigetes

In Georg Wissowa's terminology, the di indigetes or indigites were Roman deities not adopted from other religions, as distinguished from the "di novensides". Wissowa thus regarded the "indigetes" as "indigenous" gods, and the "novensides" as "newcomer gods". Ancient usage, however, does not treat the two terms as a dichotomy, nor maintain this clear-cut distinction. Wissowa's interpretation is no longer widely accepted and the meaning remains uncertain.
In classical Latin, the epithet "Indiges", singular in form, is applied to Sol "(Sol Indiges)" and to Jupiter of Lavinium, later identified with Aeneas. One theory holds that it means the "speaker within", and goes back to before the recognition of divine persons. Another, which the Oxford Classical Dictionary holds more likely, is that it means "invoked" in the sense of "pointing to", as in the related word "indigitamenta".
In Augustan literature, the "di indigites" are often associated with "di patrii" and appear in lists of local divinities (that is, divinities particular to a place). Servius notes that Praeneste had its own "indigetes".
Evidence pertaining to "di indigites" is rarely found outside Rome and Lavinium, but a fragmentary inscription from Aletrium (modern Alatri, north of Frosinone) records offerings to "di Indicites" including Fucinus, a local lake-god; Summanus, a god of nocturnal lightning; Fiscellus, otherwise unknown, but perhaps a local mountain god; and the Tempestates, weather deities. The inscription has been interpreted as a list of local or nature deities to whom transhumant shepherds should make propitiary offers.
Wissowa listed 33 "di indigetes", including two collectives in the plural, the Lares of the estate and the Lemures of the dead. Any list of "indigetes", however, is conjectural; Raimo Anttila points out that "we do not know the list of the "di indigetes"."
Ancient sources.
Carl Koch compiled a list of Latin authors and inscriptions using the phrase "di indigetes" or "Indiges":
Scholarship on the "di indigetes".
C. Koch, A. Grenier, H. J. Rose, Hendrik Wagenvoort, E. Vetter, K. Latte, G. Radke, R. Schilling and more recently R. Anttilla have made contributions to the enquiry into the meaning of the word "Indiges" and on the original nature of the "di indigetes".
Particularly complete is Carl Koch's analysis which centres mainly on the question of "Sol Indiges".
Koch has argued that "Sol Indiges" is the god to which is devoted the "Agonium" of December 11 on the grounds of the fragment of the "fasti" discovered at Ostia in 1921 which reads ag]ON IND[igeti CIL XIV 4547 and of Johannes Lydus "de Mensibus" IV 155: "...Agonalia daphneephorooi kai genarcheeei Heliooi...": Agonalia for the laurel bearer and primaeval ancestor Sol, that Lydus compares to a similar custom in Athens terminating with laurel bearing. "Sol Indiges" had two festivals, the other one being on August 9 on the Quirinal. He remarks too that the festival of December 11 is in correspondence with the "Matralia" of June 11 dedicated to Mater Matuta, considered the goddess of dawn and, in the ritual, the aunt of the sun, son of the night. Koch was the first to advance the hypothesis of the Sol Indiges as the Forefather (Stammvater) of the Roman nation.
Albert Grenier has contributed a paper in which he expounds the results obtained by Koch and pays more attention to the original nature of the di Indigetes. As Koch had already done he cites the formula of the oath of loyalty to M. Livius Drusus in 91 B.C. by a Latin chief preserved by Diodorus
Siculus in which are mentioned, after Iuppiter Capitolinus, Vesta and Mars Pater, "Helios genarchees" and "euergetin zooin te kai phytoon Geen", 'the mother Earth which benefits animals and plants'. Grenier thinks "Sol Indiges" and the "Good Mother Earth", whom he interprets to be the "Mater Matuta" of the "Matralia", would be the "di Indigetes" of the "devotio" of Decius Mus. He goes on to analyse the other testimonies related to the cult of the "di indigetes" found in Dionysius of Halicarnassus. The first is the inscription on the monument on the Numicius supposed to be dedicated to "Aeneas Iuppiter Indiges" which reads: "Of the Father God chthonios who rules the flow of the Numicius". Grenier remarks the inscription does not mention Aeneas and is in fact just a small sanctuary of the god of the river. In this same region Pliny (see above) mentions a "Sol Indiges" and Dionysius describes a monument called at his time "Sanctuary of the Sun", made up by two altars on an East–West line by a marsh: it was believed to have been erected by Aeneas as a token of thanksgiving for the miracle of the spring. On this evidence Grenier concludes that "Sol Indiges" is connected to Lavinium and to the cult of the "Penates publici" of Rome, this fact being supported by Varro: "Lavinium ibi dii penates nostri". This identification is further supported by the tradition that the new consuls upon entering office sacrificed on this "Sanctuary of the sun" to Iuppiter Indiges and the by the fact that the formulae of the oaths never mention the "di indigetes" along with Iuppiter: e.g. the Table of Bantia reads: "Iuranto per Iovem deosque Penates". Grenier concludes from such evidence that the "Penates" were included within the "indigetes". The Roman "Penates publici" were represented as two male youngsters similar to the Dioscures and identified with the gods brought by Aeneas from Troy to Latium. As the true identity of the Indigetes was secret to avoid exauguration Grenier considers a later development the identification with Aeneas and Romulus and thinks the original "indigetes" were naturalistic gods, forces like the sun, the earth and the waters which make the wheat and the children grow. Finally he concludes they should have been the "turba deorum" of the "indigitamenta" which in his view expressed the animistic nature of the most ancient Roman religion.
A relevant point in the discussion of the sources that Grenier has though overlooked is the fact that the inscription quoted in Greek by Dionysius (I 64 end), "Patros Theoy Chthonioy...", must translate Latin "Dei Patrii Indigetis". For a correspondence see the Greek interpretation of Tages as "Hermes Chthonios".
Similar conclusions have been reached by Hendrik Wagenvoort in his book "Roman Dynamism" Oxford 1947, chapter III "Numen, Novensiles and Indigetes", p. 73–103, as Grenier acknowledges.
H. J. Rose has refused Koch's interpretation of the di Indigetes as the primordial ancestors (Stammvater) of the Roman nation on the grounds that the formula of Diodorus is not a Roman original but is framed along the Greek fashion and looks to reflect a Greek model.
Kurt Latte has supported Carl Koch's thesis that the most ancient Roman religious concepts were based on the natural forces of the sun, moon and waters. He cites and quotes the invocations to the goddess of the Moon at the beginning of every month by the "pontifex minor", who repeated for five or seven times the invocation: ""Dies te quinque calo Iuno Covella"" or when the Nonae were on the seventh day: ""Septem dies te calo Iuno Covella"". The invocation to the god of the "Tiber" during the summer draught: ""Adesto Tiberine, cum tuis undis"". These invocations he supposes were justified by a faith in the magic power of words. "Pater Indiges" is attested by Solinus (II 15) as referred to Aeneas after his disappearance on the Numicius and Dionysius too makes reference to the Numicius. Latte thinks that it must be the same cult and the question is whether in augustan times the original Pater Indiges was transformed into "Iuppiter Indiges". Whereas Dionysius's text may imply the latter interpretation to be the right one Latte thinks the material is insufficient to reach a decision.
The other occurrence of "Indiges" in the singular is that of "Sol Indiges" of which two festivals are known as well as the location of his cult on the Quirinal (from the Fasti) one of which is the "Ag]on. Ind[igeti" mentioned in the Fasti of Ostia and in Lydus "De Mensibus" IV 155. Latte argues that the date of this latter festival does not allow to be brought into any correspondence with the yearly course of the sun, but could perhaps be the day on which sowing should be completed, citing Columella, thus the sacrifice should refer to the power of the sun on vegetation.
Latte concludes that by putting all the above elements together it could be argued that "Indiges" might be traced to a representation in which man requests the god to ensure the safety of his sowing. As "Numicus" has its parallel with "Tiber" so "Sol" has its own one in the goddess of the Moon. The naive faith in the influence of celestial bodies has countless parallels even e.g. in Athens.
Latte goes on to say that besides these two there are only instances in the plural which were already not understood by the ancient in Varro's times. The poets of the augustan times had just a vague idea that the word was an archaism that entailed a strong ancient Roman taint in appealing to the gods, without any clear idea of its original meaning. Latte refuses Wissowa's position that it was a central concept in Roman theology, also on the grounds of its irrelevance in the Roman calendar which reflects the most ancient known religious historical representation. The iscription from Sora dating to 4 B. C. could be the issue of augustan restoration and not a proof of an original "Iuppiter indiges". Another inscription from Ardea mentions "novem deivo" and the context clearly does not allow the interpretation of "newly imported", disproving Wissowa's assumptions.
Latte has also enquired into the etymology of the word "indiges". He recalls the attempt by Krestchmer to explain it with "digitus" (finger) which meets difficulties because in Rome one did not use fingers in invoking the gods and in the common original exit of the ancient singular. The most ancient connection with "ag-ye", "aio" by Corssen is based on "indigitare" (frequentative as "agitare" for "agere"). However more recent discussions have asked this interpretation into question as such formations are usually found only for monosyllabic verbal themes showing a vocalic shift with a preverbal, such as "comes", "superstes", "trames", which "aio" excludes; moreover they have in Latin an active meaning. Also the hypothesis of a retrograde formation from "indigitare" meets both linguistic and semantic difficulties: the construction with "agere" in the meaning of "rendering oneself present" implies an impossible formation from a consonantic shift and the semantics of "agere" to render oneself present is highly unlikely for ancient times.
Another relevant remark by Latte concerns the belief in the effecacy of the divine appellatives, which are sometimes the same for different gods such as "Heries Iunonis" and "Heres Martea". The Iguvine Tables mention a "ahtu iuvio" and a "ahtu marti" interpreted as "Actui Iovio" and "Actui Martio" to which sacrifices are offered. Latte remarks that here the offer is made to the abstract concept of the virtue or power of the god and not to the god himself. Other gods had special entities representing their power as in Rome "Salacia Neptuni" and "Lua Saturni".
Latte finally refuses the interpretation "indigetes divi" for Greek "daimones" found in the translation by Macrobius of Hesiod "Opera" 121 considering it influenced by late time speculations. The connexion of the gentilician cult of the sun of the Aurelii with that of "Sol Indiges" is impossible to prove.
Most recently glottologist Raimo Anttilla has made renewed attempts into the enquiry of the original meaning of the word "indiges" in his book on protoindoeuropean root *ag.
He thinks all the etymological and formal impasses mentioned by Latte could be overcome if one makes the basis of "indiges" instead of verb "aio" (I say) verb "ago" in the sense of to impel, to drive, in this case to drive from within ("*endo agentes"). The action of the gods would the that of driving man just as man drives cattle e.g. also in sacrifice (agonium, etymology already cited by Ovid in his "Fasti" I 319 ff).
Anttilla bases his analysis on the results of Latte, Radke, Schilling and Ancellotti and Cerri.
On the basis of this big picture Anttilla attempts to draw a more precise conclusion and overcome the remaining formal difficulties. He argues that holding to the old interpretation of "indiges" as 'the caller (forth)' and interpreting the uncertain Umbrian consonant-stem dative plural "acetus" 'to the callers forth' as Ancellotti and Cerri do is doubtful and the etymology would be better represented by an *ag- drive than by an *ag-ye say, as the supposed root *kei/*ki is a moving root too and not a calling root. Radke has also proposed the possibility of *en-dhigh-et- grade 0 as in "figulus" (from IE stem DHEIG) as a nomen agentis menaing 'forming, shaping, generating from within', close to impelling.
To support his analysis Anttilla cites a medical term "indigo/indigere" meaning to drive bodily fluids, which is not attested in ancient texts. A hard tumor (scirosis) 'fit ex glutinoso et spisso humore quod confluendo ita membris indigitur ut insitus locis ubi considerit unum esse videatur': the tumor is formed by humours that run together to a certain location by pushing the limbs from the inside so as it looks one thing with the limb where they set. So tumors are pushed in as tubers and plants. Although the lexicographic evidence is flimsy Anttilla thinks it is important owing to the close relation between medicine and religion. "Indiges, indigere" would hint to something coming out and bringing forth an end result (pushing into a state). Drive in is at the same time come out. The richness of nature deities or their epithets (ahtu) brings about the beneficial result of life/food. The coordinator would be Iuppiter Indiges, the Impeller corresponding to "Zeus Ageetoor" at Sparta.
Finally Anttilla considers the worst formal difficulty left that of the suffix -et- and its vowel not rising in indigetes, as remarked by Radke p. 151. Similar formations are merges/mergitis sheaf, ales/alitis winged, mansues/mansuetis tame, seges/segetis cornfield, harvest, produce, two of which pertain to the growing and reaping domain; Anttilla thinks in archaic religious language peculiar forms are often preserved. "Indigitare" evoking gods would be to drive them in for our needs and "Sol Indiges" would be the force that drives all of nature, particularly food. Radke and Ancellotti e Cerri interpret the -t- form as a kind of active participle or agent noun and this would be the only possibility. Latte too gives as a background for "indiges" the general appeal to natural forces in Roman religion, e.g. the summoning of the Moon goddess and other instances.
Archeological finds.
At Lavinium in 1958 was excavated an inscription dated to the 3rd century BC reading "Lare Aineia" and in 1971 a templet built over a princely cenotaph in the Oriental style of the 7th century BC probably on the site of a "heroon" described by Dionysius Halicarnassus. This would support an ancient assimilation of Aeneas to "Indiges Pater".

</doc>
<doc id="84944" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84944" title="Timeline of computing 1990–99">
Timeline of computing 1990–99


</doc>
<doc id="84945" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84945" title="Timeline of computing 1980–89">
Timeline of computing 1980–89


</doc>
<doc id="84946" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84946" title="Timeline of computing 1950–79">
Timeline of computing 1950–79


</doc>
<doc id="84947" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84947" title="Timeline of computing hardware 2400 BC–1949">
Timeline of computing hardware 2400 BC–1949

This article presents a detailed timeline of events in the history of computing hardware: from prehistory until 1949. For narratives explaining the overall developments, see History of computing.

</doc>
<doc id="84948" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84948" title="Matthias Claudius">
Matthias Claudius

Matthias Claudius (15 August 1740 – 21 January 1815) was a German poet and journalist, otherwise known by the penname of “Asmus”.
Life.
Claudius was born at Reinfeld, near Lübeck, and studied at Jena. He spent the greater part of his life in the town of Wandsbeck, where he earned his first literary reputation by editing from 1771 to 1775, a newspaper called "Der Wandsbecker Bote" (The Wandsbeck Messenger) ("Wandsbeck" until the year 1879 still written with "ck". Today only with "k".), in which he published a large number of prose essays and poems. They were written in pure and simple German, and appealed to the popular taste; in many there was a vein of extravagant humour or even burlesque, while others were full of quiet meditation and solemn sentiment. In his later days, perhaps through the influence of Klopstock, with whom he had formed an intimate acquaintance, Claudius became strongly pietistic, and the graver side of his nature showed itself. In 1814 he moved to Hamburg, to the house of his son-in-law, the publisher Friedrich Christoph Perthes, where he died on 21 January 1815.
Works.
Claudius's poem "Death and the Maiden" was used by composer Franz Schubert in 1817 for one of his most celebrated songs, which in turn became the basis for the 1824 string quartet of the same name.
Claudius's collected works were published under the title of "Asmus omnia sua secum portans, oder Sämtliche Werke des Wandsbecker Boten" (8 vols., 1775–1812; 13th edition, by C. Redich, 2 vols., 1902). His biography has been written by Wilhelm Herbst (4th ed., 1878). See also M. Schneidereit, "M. Claudius, seine Weltanschauung und Lebensweisheit" (1898).
Quotes.
On Goethe's "The Sorrows of Young Werther" 177/4

</doc>
<doc id="84949" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84949" title="Baumgardener's Covered Bridge">
Baumgardener's Covered Bridge

The Baumgardener's Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Pequea Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Pequea #10 Bridge. 
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge is located approximately north of Frogtown Road on Covered Bridge Road just to the east of Pennsylvania Route 324 in Martic Township. The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-25. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 11, 1980.
History.
The Baumgardener's Covered Bridge was built in 1860 by Davis Kitch at a cost of $1,284. In 1987 the bridge was restored after it was damaged in a flood the previous year. During the restoration process, which cost $200,000, the bridge was raised by and lengthened by to protect it from damage in potential future flooding.

</doc>
<doc id="84950" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84950" title="Francis Bellamy">
Francis Bellamy

Francis Julius Bellamy (May 18, 1855 – August 28, 1931) was a Christian socialist minister and author, best known for writing the American Pledge of Allegiance.
Personal life.
Francis Julius Bellamy was born in Mount Morris, NY. His family was deeply involved in the Baptist church and they moved to Rome, NY when Bellamy was only 5. Here, Bellamy became an active member of the First Baptist Church; which his father was minister of until his death in 1864. He attended college at the University of Rochester, in Rochester, NY and studied theology and was part of the Alpha Delta Phi Fraternity.
As a young man, he became a Baptist minister and, influenced by the vestiges of the Second Great Awakening, began to travel to promote his faith and help his community. Bellamy's travels brought him to Massachusetts. It was there that he penned the "Pledge of Allegiance" for a campaign by the "Youth's Companion;" a patriotic circular of the day. Bellamy "believed in the absolute separation of church and state" and did not include the phrase "one nation under God" within his original pledge.
Bellamy married Harriet Benton in Newark, NY in 1881. They had two sons: John, who lived in California, and David, who lived in Rochester, New York. His first wife died in 1918, and he later married Marie Morin (1920).
Bellamy ran for Governor of New York, but lost. His daughter-in-law Rachael (David's wife) lived in Rochester until Feb/Mar of 1989 when she died at the age of 93. No information is readily available on son John or his family in California or of any other relatives. David and Rachael had two children, David Jr. and Peter.
Francis Bellamy spent most of the last years of his life living and working in Tampa, FL. He died there on August 28, 1931 at the age of 76. His cremated remains were brought back to New York where they were buried in a family plot in a cemetery in Rome.
The Pledge.
In 1891, Daniel Sharp Ford, the owner of the "Youth's Companion", hired Bellamy to work with Ford's nephew James B. Upham in the magazine's premium department. In 1888, the "Youth's Companion" had begun a campaign to sell American flags to public schools as a premium to solicit subscriptions. For Upham and Bellamy, the flag promotion was more than merely a business move; under their influence, the "Youth's Companion" became a fervent supporter of the schoolhouse flag movement, which aimed to place a flag above every school in the nation. Four years later, by 1892, the magazine had sold American flags to approximately 26,000 schools. By this time the market was slowing for flags, but was not yet saturated.
In 1892, Upham had the idea of using the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus reaching the Americas to further bolster the schoolhouse flag movement. The magazine called for a national Columbian Public School Celebration to coincide with the World's Columbian Exposition. A flag salute was to be part of the official program for the Columbus Day celebration to be held in schools all over America.
The Pledge was published in the September 8, 1892, issue of the magazine, and immediately put to use in the campaign. Bellamy went to speak to a national meeting of school superintendents to promote the celebration; the convention liked the idea and selected a committee of leading educators to implement the program, including the immediate past president of the National Education Association. Bellamy was selected as the chair. Having received the official blessing of educators, Bellamy's committee now had the task of spreading the word across the nation and of designing an official program for schools to follow on the day of national celebration. He structured the program around a flag-raising ceremony and his pledge.
His original Pledge read as follows:
The recital was accompanied with a salute to the flag known as the Bellamy salute, described in detail by Bellamy. During World War II, the salute was replaced with a hand-over-heart gesture because the original form involved stretching the arm out towards the flag in a manner that resembled the later Nazi salute. ("For a history of the pledge, see Pledge of Allegiance").
In 1954, in response to the perceived threat of secular Communism, President Eisenhower encouraged Congress to add the words "under God," creating the 31-word pledge that is recited today.
Bellamy commented on his thoughts as he created the pledge, and his reasons for choosing the careful wording:
Bellamy "viewed his Pledge as an 'inoculation' that would protect immigrants and native-born but insufficiently patriotic Americans from the 'virus' of radicalism and subversion."
Political views.
Bellamy was a Christian socialist who "championed 'the rights of working people and the equal distribution of economic resources, which he believed was inherent in the teachings of Jesus.'" In 1891, Bellamy was "forced from his Boston pulpit for preaching against the evils of capitalism", and eventually stopped attending church altogether after moving to Florida, reportedly because of the racism he witnessed there.
In "Cultural Movements and Collective Memory : Christopher Columbus and the Rewriting of the National Origin Myth," Timothy Kubal explains:
On immigration and universal suffrage, Bellamy wrote: " democracy like ours cannot afford to throw itself open to the world where every man is a lawmaker, every dull-witted or fanatical immigrant admitted to our citizenship is a bane to the commonwealth.” And further: "Where all classes of society merge insensibly into one another every alien immigrant of inferior race may bring corruption to the stock. There are races more or less akin to our own whom we may admit freely and get nothing but advantage by the infusion of their wholesome blood. But there are other races, which we cannot assimilate without lowering our racial standard, which we should be as sacred to us as the sanctity of our homes."

</doc>
<doc id="84951" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84951" title="Bitzer's Mill Covered Bridge">
Bitzer's Mill Covered Bridge

The Bitzer's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans the Conestoga River in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. It is the oldest bridge in the county still in use. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Big Conestoga #2 Bridge. The bridge is also called Martin's Mill Bridge, Eberly's Cider Mill Covered Bridge, and Fiand's/Fiantz's Covered Bridge.
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. Added later, secondary steel I-beams support the bridge from underneath. The bridge is painted red on the outside, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges. The inside of the bridge is not painted. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color. As of July 2006, the bridge has some damage to its sides including some missing or broken panels.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-04. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003516. It is located at (40.1405, -76.1520) near the junction of U.S. Route 222 and U.S. Route 322 southeast of Ephrata in West Earl Township. The bridge can be reached by going approximately south from U.S. Route 322 on Cabin Drive which becomes Conestoga Creek Road. A left onto Cider Mill Road leads straight to the bridge, which is visible from the intersection.
History.
The bridge was built in 1846 by George Fink and Sam Reamsnyder at a cost of $1,115. They used a single span, wooden, double Burr arch truss construction. At some point later, steel I-beams were installed under the floor to add support to the oldest bridge in Lancaster County. The bridge has historically been referred to by a number of names that reflected the various mill owners. In 1962, it was proposed to replace the bridge with a concrete span, but the plan was discontinued after much public outcry.

</doc>
<doc id="84952" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84952" title="Marvelous Marvin Hagler">
Marvelous Marvin Hagler

Marvelous Marvin Hagler (born Marvin Nathaniel Hagler; May 23, 1954) is an American former professional boxer who reigned as the undisputed middleweight champion from 1980 to 1987. He made twelve defenses of the undisputed title and today holds the highest knockout percentage of all undisputed middleweight champions, at 78%. At six years and seven months, his reign as undisputed middleweight champion is the second longest of the last century, behind only Tony Zale, who reigned during World War II. In 1982, annoyed that network announcers often did not refer to him by his nickname, "Marvelous", Hagler legally changed his name to Marvelous Marvin Hagler.
Hagler is an inductee of the International Boxing Hall of Fame and the World Boxing Hall of Fame. He was named Fighter of the Decade (1980s) by "Boxing Illustrated" magazine, and twice named Fighter of the Year by "The Ring" magazine and the Boxing Writers Association of America (BWAA). In 2001 and 2004, "The Ring" named him the third greatest middleweight of all time and in 2002 named him the 17th greatest fighter of the past 80 years. The International Boxing Research Organisation (IBRO) rates Hagler as the sixth greatest middleweight of all time. Boxrec rates Hagler the sixth best middleweight of all time. Many analysts and boxing writers, consider Hagler to have one of the best chins in boxing history.
Early life and amateur career.
Hagler spent his early years in Newark, New Jersey's Central Ward. Following the Newark Riots of July 12–17, 1967, in which 26 people were killed and $11 million in property damage was caused, including the destruction of the Hagler family's tenement, the Haglers moved to Brockton, Massachusetts. In 1969, Hagler took up boxing after walking into a gym in the town owned by brothers Pat and Goody Petronelli, who became his trainers and managers. In 1973, Hagler won the National AAU 165-pound title after defeating Atlanta's Terry Dobbs.
Professional boxing career.
Early career.
Hagler was a # 1 ranked middleweight boxer for many years before he could fight for the title. Hagler struggled to find high profile opponents willing to face him in his early years. Joe Frazier told Hagler, 'You have three strikes against you, "You're black, you're a southpaw, and you're good.' He often had to travel to his opponents' hometowns to get fights. His first break came when he was offered --on two weeks' notice-- a chance against Willie 'the Worm' Monroe, who was being trained by Frazier. Hagler lost the decision but the fight was close, so Monroe gave him a rematch. This time Hagler knocked out Monroe in 12 rounds. In a third fight, he stopped Monroe in two rounds.
Boston promoter Rip Valenti took an interest in Hagler and began bringing in top ranked opponents for Hagler to face. He fought 1972 Olympics gold medalist Sugar Ray Seales; Hagler won the first time, the second was a draw and Hagler knocked out Seales in the third fight. Number 1 ranked Mike Colbert was knocked out in the twelfth and also had his jaw broken by Hagler. Briton Kevin Finnegan was stopped in eight. Afterwards Finnegan required 40 stitches in his face. He dropped a controversial decision to Bobby 'Boogaloo' Watts, but knocked out Watts in two rounds in a rematch. Hagler won a ten-round decision over 'Bad' Bennie Briscoe. By then, promoter Bob Arum took notice and signed him.
First title shot.
In November 1979, Hagler fought World Middleweight Champion Vito Antuofermo at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada. After fifteen rounds, most thought that Hagler had won. Referee Mills Lane directed Hagler to turn and face the television cameras. "Congratulations," he said. "Now stay facing this way until they announce the decision and I raise your arm." Hagler and many others were surprised when the decision was announced as a draw and Antuofermo retained his title. This only added to Hagler's frustrations. Hagler had the boxing skills and killer instinct to knock Vito out, but instead he played it safe and it cost him the title.
World Champion.
Antuofermo lost his title later to British boxer Alan Minter, who gave Hagler his second title shot. Hagler went to Wembley Arena to face Minter. The tense atmosphere was stoked further when Minter was quoted as saying that "No black man is going to take my title"—Minter would later insist he meant ""that" black man". Hagler took command and his slashing punches soon opened up the cut prone Minter. The referee halted the contest after 3 rounds. After 7 years and 50 fights, Hagler was now World Middleweight Champion. At the conclusion of this bout a riot broke out and Hagler and his trainers had to be carried away to their locker rooms by the police, in the middle of a rain of beer bottles and glasses.
Hagler proved a busy world champion. He defeated future world champion Fulgencio Obelmejias of Venezuela by a knockout in eight rounds and then former world champ Antuofermo in a rematch by TKO in four rounds. Both matches were fought at the Boston Garden near Hagler's hometown, endearing him to Boston fight fans. Syrian born Mustafa Hamsho, who won his shot in an eliminator with Wilfredo Benitez and would later defeat future world champion Bobby Czyz, became Hagler's next challenger, put up a lot of resistance but was finally beaten in 11 tough rounds. Michigan fighter William "Caveman" Lee lasted only one round, and in a rematch in Italy, Obelmejias lasted five rounds. British Champion (and mutual Alan Minter conqueror) Tony Sibson followed in Hagler's ever-growing list of unsuccessful challengers. Sibson provided one of the most entertaining (to this point) fights of Marvelous Marvin's career, but he ultimately fell short, lasting six rounds. Next, came Wilford Scypion, who only lasted four. By then, Hagler was a staple on HBO, the Pay Per View of its time.
Marvin Hagler vs Roberto Durán.
A fight against Roberto Durán followed. Durán was the first challenger to last the distance with Hagler in a world-championship bout. Durán was the WBA Light Middleweight Champion and went up in weight to challenge for Hagler's middleweight crown. Hagler won a unanimous 15-round decision, although after 13 rounds, Duran was ahead by one point on two scorecards and even on the third. Hagler, with his left eye swollen and cut, came on strong in the last two rounds to win the fight.
More title defenses.
Then came Juan Roldán of Argentina, who became the only man to be credited with a knockdown of Hagler, scoring one knockdown seconds into the fight - which was clearly a slip to anyone who saw it. Hagler protested bitterly that he had been pulled/pushed to the canvas. Hagler took his revenge though, he introduced his thumb in Roldan's left eye, then brutalized him over ten rounds and stopping him in the middle of round ten. Sugar Ray Leonard was calling the fight ringside with HBO analyst Barry Tompkins. He noted to Tompkins between rounds that Hagler looked older and slower. "Marvin might finally be slowing down, Barry" Leonard remarked. Many people believe this is the fight that gave Sugar Ray Leonard the idea that he could actually win a fight with the aging Hagler.
Hamsho was given a rematch, but the Syrian was again TKO'd, this time in only three rounds. Hamsho angered Hagler with a trio of intentional headbutts in the second round and a fourth early in the third, goading the normally patient and cautious Hagler into a full-out attack that left Hamsho battered and defensless in a matter of seconds.
The War.
On April 15, 1985, Hagler and Thomas Hearns met in what was billed as The Fight; later it would become known as "The War." Hagler, despite a cut to the head and being covered in blood, managed to overpower Hearns in the third round after a glancing right hand followed by two more rights and a left, scoring a decisive knockout. The first round of Hagler vs, Hearns is often considered to be among the best three minutes in boxing in middleweight history as the two fighters stood toe-to-toe trading blows. Rounds two and three couldn't live up to the first, as Hearns broke his hand in the first round, but were still very competitive. The fight only lasted eight minutes but it is rightly regarded as a classic and is considered to this day to be Hagler's greatest achievement. Commentator Al Michaels uttered the now-immortal line, "It didn't go very far, but it was a beauty!" The fight was named "Fight of the Year" by "The Ring".
Hagler vs Mugabi.
Next was Olympic silver medalist John Mugabi of Uganda, who was 26–0 with 26 knockouts and was ranked the number one contender by all three major bodies. The fight was fought on March 10, 1986 as Hagler had hurt his back and could not fight on the first date booked in 1985. Hagler stopped Mugabi in the 11th round of a brutal fight. Many ringside observers, including analyst Gil Clancy, noticed that Hagler was showing signs of advanced ring wear and age. He was much slower of hand and foot and seemed much easier to hit. He had also completely morphed his ring style from a slick, quick-fisted, boxer/puncher to a strictly flat-footed, stalking, slugger to compensate for his loss of speed and reflexes. Hagler was now said to be seriously considering retirement. Hagler's promoter Bob Arum was quoted as saying he was expecting Hagler to retire in the face of being challenged by Sugar Ray Leonard.
Marvin Hagler vs Sugar Ray Leonard.
The Super Fight.
Hagler's next challenger was Sugar Ray Leonard, who was returning to the ring after a three-year retirement (having fought just once in the previous five years.) During the pre-fight negotiations, in return for granting Hagler a larger share of the purse Leonard obtained several conditions which would be crucial to his strategy; a 20x20ft ring, 10oz gloves and the fight was to be over 12—not 15—rounds. Leonard was 2 years younger, had half as many fights, and unbeknownst to Hagler, had engaged in several 'real' fights behind closed doors (i.e. gloves, rounds, a referee, judges and no head gear) in order to shake off his ring rust. The fight took place at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas on April 6, 1987. Hagler was the betting favorite.
Hagler, a natural southpaw, opened the fight boxing out of an orthodox stance. After the quick and slick Leonard won the first two rounds on all three scorecards, Hagler started the third round as a southpaw. Hagler did better, though Leonard's superior speed and boxing skill kept him in the fight. But by the fifth, Leonard, who was moving a lot, began to tire and Hagler started to get closer. As he tired Leonard began to clinch with more frequency (in total referee Richard Steele gave him over 30 warnings for holding, although never deducted a point). Hagler buckled Leonard's knees with a right uppercut near the end of the round, which finished with Leonard on the ropes. Hagler continued to score effectively in round six. Leonard, having slowed down, was obliged to fight more and run less.
In rounds seven and eight, Hagler's southpaw jab was landing solidly and Leonard's counter flurries were less frequent. Round nine was the most exciting round of the fight. Hagler hurt Leonard with a left cross and pinned him in a corner. Leonard was in trouble, then furiously tried to fight his way out of the corner. The action see-sawed back and forth for the rest of the round, with each man having his moments. Round ten was tame by comparison, as the pace slowed after the furious action of the previous round. Clearly tiring, Leonard boxed well in the eleventh. Every time Hagler scored, Leonard came back with something flashier, if not as effective. In the final round, Hagler continued to chase Leonard. He hit Leonard with a big left hand and backed him into a corner. Leonard responded with a flurry and danced away with Hagler in pursuit. The fight ended with Hagler and Leonard exchanging along the ropes. Hagler began dancing in celebration of his performance while Leonard alternately collapsed to the canvas and raised both his arms in triumph. Leonard threw 629 punches and landed 306, while Hagler threw 792 and landed 291.
Hagler later said that, as the fighters embraced in the ring after the fight, Leonard said to him, "You beat me man". Hagler said after the fight, "He said I beat him and I was so happy". Leonard denied making the statement and claimed he only told Hagler, "You're a great champion".
Leonard was announced as winner by split decision, which remains hotly disputed to this day.
Reaction.
Official ringside judge JoJo Guerra, whose 118–110 scorecard was derided in many quarters, commented that:
Judge Dave Moretti, who scored it 115–113 for Leonard:
Lou Filippo, who scored it 115–113 for Hagler and felt that Hagler's bodyshots and aggression earned him the nod, said:
Hugh McIlvanney, commenting in the British "Sunday Times" and "Sports Illustrated":
McIlvanny also referred to Budd Schulberg's contention about a 'compound optical illusion', namely that simply being more competitive than expected meant that Leonard appeared more effective and to be doing more than he actually was. Harry Gibbs, the British judge who ironically had been rejected by the Hagler camp, said he also scored it for Hagler.
Jim Murray, long-time sports columnist for the "Los Angeles Times" felt that Leonard deservedly got the decision, arguing that Leonard landed more punches and showed better defense and ring generalship, and writing: 
The scorecards from the ringside press attest to the closeness of the fight (6–5, 3 drawn) more pundits awarded the fight to Leonard rather than to Hagler, although counting those who scored it even, more felt Hagler deserved to keep his title than didn't:
Rematch.
Hagler requested a rematch but Leonard chose to retire again (the third of five high profile retirements announced by Leonard), having said he would do so beforehand. Hagler himself retired from boxing in June 1988, declaring that he was "tired of waiting" for Leonard to grant him a rematch. In 1990, Leonard finally offered Hagler a rematch which reportedly would have earned him $15m, but he declined. By then he had settled down to a new life as an actor in Italy and was now uninterested in boxing. He said "A while ago, yeah, I wanted him so bad, but I'm over that." At the 1994 Consumer Electronics Show Hagler and Leonard had a mock rematch by playing against each other in the video game "Boxing Legends of the Ring", and claimed that an actual rematch was being planned.
Training style.
Hagler had a unique training regimen in which he would hole up on Cape Cod in motels that had closed for the winter. For his "road work" he would take to the pavement in army boots, declaring running shoes "sissy shoes." He would run much of his route backwards to prepare for movements in the boxing ring.
Career after boxing.
After the loss to Leonard, Hagler moved to Italy, where he became a well-known star of action films. His roles include a US Marine in the films ' and '. In 1996, he starred alongside Giselle Blondet in "Virtual Weapon". Hagler has provided boxing commentary for British television. Another foray into the entertainment field includes work in the video game "".
Former middleweight southpaw boxer Robbie Sims is Hagler's half brother. Hagler has five children with his first wife, Bertha, including Charelle, Celeste, James, Marvin, Jr., and Gentry. Although he owns a home in Bartlett, New Hampshire, Hagler currently lives in Milan. In May 2000, he married his second wife Kay, an Italian woman, in Pioltello, Italy.
Boxing titles.
"Major World Titles:"
"The Ring/Lineal Championship Titles:"
"Regional/International Titles:"

</doc>
<doc id="84955" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84955" title="Abundantia">
Abundantia

In ancient Roman religion, Abundantia () was a divine personification of abundance and prosperity. She was among the embodiments of virtues in religious propaganda that cast the emperor as the ensurer of "Golden Age" conditions. Abundantia thus figures in art, cult, and literature, but has little mythology as such. She may have survived in some form in Roman Gaul and medieval France.
In Rome.
The Augustan poet Ovid gives Abundantia a role in the myth of Acheloüs the river god, one of whose horns was ripped from his forehead by Hercules. The horn was taken up by the Naiads and transformed into the cornucopia that was granted to Abundantia. (Other aetiological myths provide different explanations of the cornucopia's origin.) On Neronian coinage, she was associated with Ceres and equated with Annona, who embodied the grain supply. Like Annona, Abundantia was a "virtue in action" in such locations as the harbor, where grain entered the city.
Abundantia occurs in the context of Mithraic iconography on a vase from Lezoux, in the Roman province of Gallia Aquitania, which presents the most complete depiction of the act of bull-slaying that was central to the religion. Abundantia is seated and holds a cornucopia as an image of "the abundance that stems from Mithras' act."
Possible survivals.
It has been suggested that the Gallic goddess Rosmerta had a functional equivalence to Abundantia, but the two are never directly identified in inscriptions. William of Auvergne (d. 1249), a bishop of Paris, mentions a Domina Abundia (“Mistress Abundia”), who also appears in the "Roman de la Rose" as “Dame Habonde.” The bishop derives her name from "abundantia", but he may be in error. At night the "dominae" enter houses where offerings have been set out for them. They eat and drink from the vessels, but the contents are undiminished. If they are pleased, they bring prosperity and fertility. William regarded these practices as a form of idolatry. Folklorists of the 19th century saw these figures as Celtic fairies. 
Nicholas of Cusa reports that on his travels through the French Alps in 1457, he met two old women who told him they were in the service of Domina Abundia. They identified themselves as apostate Christians, and had been imprisoned for witchcraft. Nicholas felt that they had been deluded by the devil, but should be allowed to receive penance rather than burning at the stake.
Later art and allegory.
In later Western art Abundantia is often portrayed holding her cornucopia and sheaves of corn or wheat.

</doc>
<doc id="84957" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84957" title="Theodor Fontane">
Theodor Fontane

Theodor Fontane (; 30 December 1819 – 20 September 1898) was a German novelist and poet, regarded by many as the most important 19th-century German-language realist writer.
Youth.
Fontane was born in Neuruppin, a town 30 miles northwest of Berlin, into a Huguenot family. At the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to an apothecary, his father's profession. He became an apothecary himself, and in 1839, at the age of 20, wrote his first work ("Heinrichs IV. erste Liebe", now lost). His further education was in Leipzig where he came into contact with the progressives of the Vormärz. Fontane's first published work, the novella "Geschwisterliebe" ("Sibling Love"), appeared in the "Berlin Figaro" in December 1839.
His biographer Gordon A. Craig observes that this work gave few indications of his promise as a gifted writer: "Although the theme of incest, which was to occupy Fontane on later occasions, is touched upon here, the mawkishness of the tale... is equaled by the lameness of its plot and the inertness of the style in which it is told, and characters Clärchen and her brother are both so colorless that no one could have guessed that their creator had a future as a writer."
His first job as apothecary was in Dresden after which he returned to his father's shop in the provincial town of Letschin in the Oderbruch region. Fleeing its provincial atmosphere, Fontane published articles in the Leipzig newspaper "Die Eisenbahn" and translated Shakespeare. In 1843, he joined a literary club in Berlin called Tunnel über der Spree (Tunnel over the river Spree) where he came into contact with many of the most renowned German writers including Theodor Storm, Joseph von Eichendorff and Gottfried Keller.
Newspaper writer and critic.
In 1844 Fontane enlisted in the Prussian army and set out on the first of numerous journeys to England which fostered his interest in Old English ballads, a form he began to imitate. He became engaged to his future wife, Emilie Rouanet-Kummer, whom he had met when still at school.
He briefly participated in the revolutionary events of 1848. In 1849 he quit his job as an apothecary and became a full-time journalist and writer. In order to support his family he took a job as a writer for the Prussian intelligence agency "Zentralstelle für Presseangelegenheiten" which was meant to influence the press towards the German nationalist cause.
He specialised in British affairs, and the agency made him for several years its correspondent in London where he was later joined by his wife and two sons. While still in London he quit his government job and, on his return to Berlin, became editor of the conservative "Neue Preussische Zeitung".
London.
Fontane's books about Britain include "Ein Sommer in London" (1854), "Aus England, Studien und Briefe" (1860) and "Jenseit des Tweed, Bilder und Briefe aus Schottland" (1860). The success of the historical novels of Walter Scott had helped to make British themes much "en vogue" on the continent. Fontane's "Gedichte" (1851) and ballads "Männer und Helden" (1860) tell of Britain's former glories.
Back in Germany, Fontane became particularly interested in his home province, the March of Brandenburg. He enjoyed rambling through its rural landscapes and small towns and delighted in the growth of its capital city, Berlin. His fascination with the countryside surrounding Berlin may be seen in his picturesque "Wanderungen durch die Mark Brandenburg" (1862–1882, 5 vols.) in which he transposed his former fascination with British historical matters to his native soil.
Wars of German Unification.
In 1870, he quit his job at the "Kreuzzeitung" and became drama critic for the liberal "Vossische Zeitung", a position he held until retirement. He had already written about Prussia's war against Denmark in "Der schleswig-holsteinische Krieg im Jahre 1864" (1866) and the Austro-Prussian War in "Der deutsche Krieg von 1866" (1869). He went to the front to observe the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, and, after being taken prisoner at Vaucouleurs, remained in French captivity for three months. He set down his experiences in "Kriegsgefangen Erlebtes 1870" (1871) and published his observations on the campaign in "Der Krieg gegen Frankreich 1870–71" (1874–1876).
Later years.
At the age of 57 Fontane finally worked in the genre for which he is remembered, the novel. His fine historical romance "Vor dem Sturm" ("Before the Storm") (1878) was followed by a series of novels of modern life, notably "L'Adultera" (1882), a book about adultery which was considered so risqué that it took Fontane two years to find a publisher.
In his novels "Irrungen, Wirrungen" ("Trials and Tribulations", 1888), "Frau Jenny Treibel" (1892) and "Effi Briest" (1894–95) he found his own tone, yielding insights into the lives of the nobility as well as the "common man". His achievement there was later described as poetic realism. In "Der Stechlin" (written 1895–97), his last completed novel, Fontane adapted the realistic methods and social criticism of contemporary French fiction to the conditions of Prussian life.
Death.
Fontane died on 20 September 1898, in Berlin. As a member of the French Protestant Church of Berlin, he was buried in the congregation's cemetery in on the Liesenstraße. His wife, Emilie, was buried beside him four years later. Their graves were damaged in World War II but restored thereafter.

</doc>
<doc id="84958" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84958" title="Anita Brookner">
Anita Brookner

Anita Brookner, CBE (16 July 1928 – 10 March 2016) was a British award-winning novelist and art historian. She was Slade Professor of Fine Art at the University of Cambridge from 1967 to 1968 and was the first woman to hold this visiting professorship. She was awarded the 1984 Man Booker Prize for her novel "Hotel du Lac".
Profile.
Personal life.
Brookner was born in Herne Hill, a suburb of London. She was the only child of Newson Bruckner, a Jewish immigrant from Poland, and Maude Schiska, a singer whose father had emigrated from Poland and founded a tobacco factory. Maude changed the family's surname to Brookner because of anti-German sentiment in Britain. Anita Brookner had a lonely childhood, although her grandmother and uncle lived with the family, and her parents, secular Jews, opened their house to Jewish refugees escaping Nazi persecution during the 1930s and World War II.
She was educated at the private James Allen's Girls' School. In 1949 she received a BA in History from King's College London, and in 1953 a doctorate in Art History from the Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London.
Brookner never married, but took care of her parents as they aged.
Career.
As academic.
In 1967 she became the first woman to hold the Slade Professorship of Fine Art at Cambridge University. She was promoted to Reader at the Courtauld Institute of Art in 1977, where she worked until her retirement in 1988. She was a Fellow of King's College London and of Murray Edwards College, Cambridge.
As novelist.
Already a published author of nonfiction, Brookner published her first novel, "A Start In Life" (1981), at the age of 53. Thereafter, she published roughly a novel a year. Brookner was highly regarded as a stylist. Her novels explore themes of emotional loss and difficulties associated with fitting into society, and typically depict intellectual, middle-class women, who suffer isolation and disappointments in love. Many of Brookner's characters are the children of European immigrants to Britain; a number appear to be of Jewish descent. "Hotel du Lac" (1984), her fourth novel, was awarded the Booker Prize.

</doc>
<doc id="84959" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84959" title="Acca Larentia">
Acca Larentia

Acca Larentia or Acca Larentina was a mythical woman, later goddess, in Roman mythology whose festival, the Larentalia, was celebrated on December 23.
Foster mother.
In one mythological tradition (that of Licinius Macer, et al.), she was the wife of the shepherd Faustulus, and therefore the adoptive mother of Romulus and Remus, whom she is said to have saved after they were thrown into the Tiber on the orders of Amulius. She had twelve sons, and on the death of one of them Romulus took his place, and with the remaining eleven founded the college of the Arval brothers (Fratres Arvales). She is therefore identified with the Dea Dia of that collegium. The flamen Quirinalis acted in the role of Romulus (deified as Quirinus) to perform funerary rites for his foster mother.
Benefactor of Rome.
Another tradition holds that Larentia was a beautiful girl of notorious reputation, roughly the same age as Romulus and Remus, during the reign of Ancus Marcius in the 7th century BC. She was awarded to Hercules as a prize in a game of dice by the guardian of his temple, and locked in it with his other prize, a feast. When the god no longer had need of her, he advised her to marry the first man she met as she stepped out that morning, who turned out to be a wealthy Etruscan named Carutius (or Tarrutius, according to Plutarch). Larentia later inherited all his property and bequeathed it to the Roman people. Ancus, in gratitude for this, allowed her to be buried in the Velabrum, and instituted an annual festival, the Larentalia, at which sacrifices were offered to the Lares. Plutarch explicitly states that this Laurentia was a different person from the Laurentia who was married to Faustulus, although other writers, such as Licinius Macer, relate their stories as belonging to the same being.
Prostitute.
Yet another tradition holds that Larentia was neither the wife of Faustulus nor the consort of Hercules, but a prostitute called "lupa" by the shepherds (literally "she-wolf", but colloquially "courtesan"), and who left the fortune she amassed through sex work to the Roman people.
Connection to Lares.
Whatever may be thought of the contradictory accounts of Acca Laurentia, it seems clear that she was of Etruscan origin, and connected with the worship of the Lares, from which her name may or may not be derived. This relation is also apparent in the number of her sons, which corresponds to that of the twelve country Lares. T.P. Wiseman explores the connections among Acca Larentia, Lara, and Larunda in his books "Remus: A Roman Myth" and "The Myths of Rome".
Functions.
Like Ceres, Tellus, Flora and others, Acca Laurentia symbolized the fertility of the earth, in particular the city lands and their crops. Acca Larentia is also identified with Larentina, Mana Genita, and Muta.

</doc>
<doc id="84960" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84960" title="Tarutius">
Tarutius

In Roman mythology, Tarutius or Tarrutius was a wealthy merchant married to Acca Larentia. According to Plutarch's "Life of Romulus", the keeper of the Temple of Hercules challenged the hero to a game of dice with Hercules to receive a night with a beautiful woman and a fine spread and the god to provide the temple keeper with a valuable gift if the keeper was successful.
As Hercules won the contest, the keeper procured the services of Acca Larentia for the night and provided a fine supper. In the morning, Hercules suggested that she approach the first man she met on leaving the temple. Tarutius was the man whom she met and the couple ended up marrying. Tarutius was a wealthy, older man with a large estate and is often believed to be an Etruscan.
Tarutius died shortly after their marriage, leaving no children. Acca Larentia inherited the estate and, when she disappeared, her will was found devoting the estate to Rome. This version is considered to be the basis for the full legal entitlement of areas claimed by Rome.
Augustine of Hippo referred to the legend in his book "The City of God" as an example of how the pagan gods are supposed to have delighted in human sensual pleasures. In St. Augustine's version, Tarutius is held to be a younger man who Acca Larentia meets after spending the night with Hercules in a dream. Tarutius is held to have had kept Acca Larentia as his mistress for many years, leaving his estate to her on his death. She in turn leaves the estate to Rome in her will which is found when she mysteriously disappears.

</doc>
<doc id="84962" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84962" title="Faustulus">
Faustulus

In Roman mythology, Faustulus was the shepherd who found the infants Romulus and Remus, who were being suckled by a she-wolf, known as Lupa, on the Palatine Hill. He, with his wife, Acca Larentia, raised the children. In some versions of the myth, Larentia was a prostitute (in Latin a "lupa", 'she-wolf'). The name Faustulus was later claimed by a Roman family, one of whom minted a coin showing Faustulus with the twins and she-wolf. Sextus Pompeius Fostlus issued a silver denarius in about 140 BCE that showed, on the reverse, the twins being suckled by a dangerous wolf with the shepherd Faustulus to their left.

</doc>
<doc id="84966" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84966" title="Turnus">
Turnus

In Virgil's "Aeneid", Turnus was the King of the Rutuli, and the chief antagonist of the hero Aeneas.
Biography.
According to Virgil, Turnus is the son of Daunus and the nymph Venilia. Prior to Aeneas' arrival in Italy, Turnus was the primary potential suitor of Lavinia, daughter of Latinus, King of the Latin people. Upon Aeneas' arrival, however, Lavinia is promised to the Trojan prince. Juno, determined to prolong the suffering of the Trojans, prompts Turnus to demand a war with the new arrivals. King Latinus is greatly displeased with Turnus, but steps down and allows the war to commence.
During the War between the Latins and the Trojans (along with several other Trojan allies, including King Evander's Arcadians), Turnus proves himself to be brave but hot-headed. In Book IX, he nearly takes the fortress of the Trojans after defeating many opponents, but soon gets into trouble and is only saved from death by Juno.
In Book X, Turnus slays the son of Evander, the young prince Pallas. As he gloats over the killing, he takes as a spoil of war Pallas' sword belt and puts it on. Enraged, Aeneas seeks out the Rutulian King with full intent of killing him. Virgil marks the death of Pallas by mentioning the inevitable downfall of Turnus. To prevent his death at the hands of Aeneas, Juno conjures a ghost apparition of Aeneas, luring Turnus onto a ship and to his safety. Turnus takes great offense at this action, questioning his worth and even contemplating suicide.
In Book XII, Aeneas and Turnus duel to the death; Aeneas gains the upper hand amidst a noticeably Iliad-esque chase sequence (Turnus and Aeneas run around the lines of men several times, similar to the duel of Achilles and Hector), wounding Turnus in the thigh. Turnus begs Aeneas either to spare him or give his body back to his people. Aeneas considers but upon seeing the belt of Pallas on Turnus, he is consumed by rage and finishes him off. The last line of the poem describes Turnus' unhappy passage into the Underworld.
Turnus' supporters included Latinus's wife, Amata, Juturna, his sister and minor river/ fountain deity, Mezentius, the deposed king of the Etruscans, and Queen Camilla of the Volsci, who helped him fight Aeneas.
In later literature.
In the Middle English poem "Sir Gawain and the Green Knight", the unknown poet cites as a parallel to Brutus' foundation of Britain, that of an unidentified "Ticius" to Tuscany. Although some scholars have tried to argue that "Titius" is derived from Titus Tatius, Otis Chapman has proposed that "Ticius" is a scribal error for what the poet intended to read as Turnus. On top of manuscript stylometric evidence, Chapman notes that in a passage in Ranulf Higdon's "Polychronicon", Turnus is also named as King of Tuscany. This suggests that legends in the age after Virgil came to identify Turnus "as a legendary figure like Aeneas, Romulus, "Langeberde", and Brutus".
In Book IX of John Milton's Paradise Lost, the story of Turnus and Lavinia is mentioned in relation to God's anger at Adam and Eve.
Interpretation.
Turnus can be seen as a "new Achilles," due to his Greek ancestry and his fierceness. According to Barry Powell, he may also represent Mark Antony or local peoples who must submit to Rome's empire. Powell adds that in the dispute between Turnus and Aeneas, Turnus may have the moral upper hand, having been set to marry Lavinia first. However, Turnus must be stopped since he is running counter to the force of destiny.

</doc>
<doc id="84967" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84967" title="Lavinia">
Lavinia

In Roman mythology, Lavinia (; ) is the daughter of Latinus and Amata and the last wife of Aeneas.
Lavinia, the only child of the king and "ripe for marriage", had been courted by many men who hoped to become the king of Latium. Turnus, ruler of the Rutuli, was the most likely of the suitors, having the favor of Queen Amata. King Latinus is later warned by his father Faunus in a dream oracle that his daughter is not to marry a Latin.
"Propose no Latin alliance for your daughter,
Son of mine; distrust the bridal chamber
Now prepared. Men from abroad will come
And be your sons by marriage. Blood so mingled
Lifts our name starward. Children of that stock
Will see all earth turned Latin at their feet,
Governed by them, as far as on his rounds
The Sun looks down on Ocean, East or West."
Lavinia has what is perhaps her most, or only, memorable moment in Book 7 of the "Aeneid", lines 69–83: during sacrifice at the altars of the gods, Lavinia's hair catches fire, an omen promising glorious days to come for Lavinia and war for all Latins.
Aeneas and Lavinia had one son, Silvius. Aeneas named the city Lavinium for her. According to an account by Livy, Ascanius was the son of Aeneas and Lavinia; and she ruled the Latins as a power behind the throne, for Ascanius was too young to rule.
In other works.
In Ursula K. Le Guin's 2008 novel "Lavinia", the character of Lavinia and her relationship with Aeneas is expanded and elaborated, giving insight into the life of a king's daughter in ancient Italy. Le Guin employs a self-conscious narrative device in having Lavinia as the first-person narrator know that she would not have a life without Virgil, who, being the writer of the "Aeneid", is thus her creator.
Lavinia also appears with her father Latinus in Dante's "Divine Comedy", "Inferno", Canto IV, lines 125–126.

</doc>
<doc id="84969" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84969" title="Acestes">
Acestes

In Roman mythology, Acestes or Egestes (Greek '") was the son of the Sicilian river-god Crinisus by a Dardanian or Trojan woman named Egesta or Segesta.
According to Servius, this woman Egesta or Segesta was sent by her father, Hippotes or Ipsostratus, to Sicily, that she might not be devoured by the monsters, which infested the territory of Troy, and which had been sent into the land, because the Trojans had refused to reward Poseidon and Apollo for having built the walls of their city. When Egesta arrived in Sicily, the river-god Crinisus in the form of a bear or a dog sired with her a son named Acestes, who was afterwards regarded as the hero who had founded the town of Segesta.
A slight variation on the tradition has it that Acestes welcomed Aeneas when he arrived in Sicily. The funeral games of Aeneas' father Anchises were held there. Those of Aeneas' folk who wished to voyage no further were allowed to remain behind with Acestes and together with Acestes' people they founded the city of Acesta, that is Segesta.
Mythological tradition of Dionysius.
The tradition of Acestes in Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who calls him Aegestus (), is different, for according to him, the grandfather of Aegestus quarreled with Laomedon, who slew him and gave his daughters to some merchants to convey them to a distant land. A noble Trojan however embarked with them, and married one of them in Sicily, where she subsequently gave birth to a son, Aegestus. During the war against Troy Aegestus obtained permission from Priam to return and take part in the contest, and afterwards returned to Sicily, where Aeneas on his arrival was hospitably received by him and Elymus, and built for them the towns of Aegesta and Elyme. The account of Dionysius seems to be nothing but a rationalistic interpretation of the genuine legend.
Arrow of Acestes.
In the Aeneid, Acestes participates in a trial of skill in which he shoots his arrow which then bursts into flame as a sign from Jupiter of Acestes' deserved honor.

</doc>
<doc id="84971" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84971" title="Achates">
Achates

In the "Aeneid", Achates ("good, faithful Achates", "fidus Achates" as he was called) was a close friend of Aeneas; his name became a by-word for an intimate companion. He accompanied Aeneas throughout his adventures, reaching Carthage with him in disguise when the pair were scouting the area, and leading him to the Sibyl of Cumae. Virgil represents him as remarkable for his fidelity, and a perennial type of that virtue. However, despite being Aeneas's most important Trojan, he is notable for his lack of character development. In fact, he has only one spoken line in the entire epic. Aeneas, surrounded by only a shadowy cast of allies, is thus emphasised as the lone protagonist and at the same time cut off from help on his quest.
Ships.
Actual.
"Achates" was an English galleon (one of a squadron of six ships) that took part in William Winter's campaign of 1580, against the Spanish who had occupied the fort at Smerwick, Ireland.
Five ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS Achates.
Fictional.
"Achates" was the name of the flagship in the novel "Success to the Brave", which is the 15th novel in the Richard Bolitho series written by Douglas Reeman (writing as Alexander Kent). In the novel, the "Achates" is a British ship of the line two-decker of 64 guns. It is sent as the flagship of Vice Admiral Richard Bolitho to oversee transfer of control over the island of San Felipe to the French, as part of the Treaty of Amiens.

</doc>
<doc id="84974" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84974" title="History of discovery and distribution of the remains of Aegean civilization">
History of discovery and distribution of the remains of Aegean civilization

Mycenae and Tiryns are the two principal sites on which evidence of a prehistoric civilization was remarked long ago by the classical Greeks.
The curtain-wall and towers of the Mycenaean citadel, its gate with heraldic lions, and the great "Treasury of Atreus" had borne silent witness for ages before Heinrich Schliemann's time; but they were supposed only to speak to the Homeric, or at farthest a rude Heroic beginning of purely Hellenic, civilization. It was not until Schliemann exposed the contents of the graves which lay just inside the gate, that scholars recognized the advanced stage of art to which prehistoric dwellers in the Mycenaean citadel had attained.
There had been, however, a good deal of other evidence available before 1876, which, had it been collated and seriously studied, might have discounted the sensation that the discovery of the citadel graves eventually made. Although it was recognized that certain tributaries, represented e.g. in the XVIIIth Dynasty tomb of Rekhmara at Egyptian Thebes as bearing vases of peculiar forms, were of some Mediterranean race, neither their precise habitat nor the degree of their civilization could be determined while so few actual prehistoric remains were known in the Mediterranean lands. Nor did the Aegean objects which were lying obscurely in museums in 1870, or thereabouts, provide a sufficient test of the real basis underlying the Hellenic myths of the Argolid, the Troad and Crete, to cause these to he taken seriously. Aegean vases have been exhibited both at Sèvres and Neuchâtel since about 1840, the provenience (i.e. source or origin) being in the one case Phylakope in Melos, in the other Cephalonia. 
Ludwig Ross, the German archaeologist appointed Curator of the Antiquities of Athens at the time of the establishment of the Kingdom of Greece, by his explorations in the Greek islands from 1835 onwards, called attention to certain early intaglio engraved gems, since known as Inselsteine; but it was not until 1878 that C. T. Newton demonstrated these to be no strayed Phoenician products. In 1866 primitive structures were discovered on the island of Therasia by quarrymen extracting pozzolana, a siliceous volcanic ash, for the Suez Canal works. When this discovery was followed up in 1870, on the neighbouring Santorini (Thera), by representatives of the French School at Athens, much pottery of a class now known immediately to precede the typical late Aegean ware, and many stone and metal objects, were found. These were dated by the geologist Ferdinand A. Fouqué, somewhat arbitrarily, to 2000 BC, by consideration of the superincumbent eruptive stratum. 
Meanwhile, in 1868, tombs at Ialysos in Rhodes had yielded to Alfred Biliotti many fine painted vases of styles which were called later the third and fourth "Mycenaean". However, these artifacts, bought by John Ruskin and presented to the British Museum, excited less attention than they deserved. They were deemed to be of some local Asiatic fabric of uncertain date. Nor was a connection immediately detected between them and the objects found in 1872 in a tomb at Menidi in Attica and a rock-cut "bee-hive" grave near the Argive Heraeum.
Even Schliemann's first excavations at Hissarlik in the Troad did not excite surprise. But the "Burnt City" of his second stratum, revealed in 1873, with its fortifications and vases, and a hoard of gold, silver and bronze objects, which the discoverer connected with it, began to arouse a curiosity which was destined presently to spread far outside the narrow circle of scholars. As soon as Schliemann came on the Mycenae graves three years later, light poured from all sides on the prehistoric period of Greece. It was recognized that the character of both the fabric and the decoration of the Mycenaean objects was not that of any well-known art. A wide range in space was proved by the identification of the Inselsteine and the Ialysus vases with the new style, and a wide range in time by collation of the earlier Theraean and Hissarlik discoveries. A relationship between objects of art described by Homer and the Mycenaean treasure was generally allowed, and a correct opinion prevailed that, while certainly posterior, the civilization of the Iliad was reminiscent of the Mycenaean.
Schliemann got to work again at Hissarlik in 1878, and greatly increased our knowledge of the lower strata, but did not recognize the Aegean remains in his "Lydian" city of the sixth stratum. These were not to be fully revealed until Dr. Wilhelm Dorpfeld, who had become Schliemann's assistant in 1879, resumed the work at Hissarlik in 1892 after the first explorer's death. But by laying bare in 1884 the upper stratum of remains on the rock of Tiryns, Schliemann made a contribution to our knowledge of prehistoric domestic life which was amplified two years later by Christos Tsountas' discovery of the Mycenae palace. Schliemann's work at Tiryns was not resumed till 1905, when it was proved, as had long been suspected, that an earlier palace underlies the one he had exposed.
From 1886 dates the finding of Mycenaean sepulchres outside the Argolid, from which, and from the continuation of Tsountas's exploration of the buildings and lesser graves at Mycenae, a large treasure, independent of Schliemann's princely gift, has been gathered into the National Museum at Athens. In that year dome-tombs, most already rifled but retaining some of their furniture, were excavated at Arkina and Eleusis in Attica, at Dimini near Volo in Thessaly, at Kampos on the west of Mount Taygetus, and at Maskarata in Cephalonia. The richest grave of all was explored at Vaphio in Laconia in 1889, and yielded, besides many gems and miscellaneous goldsmiths' work, two golden goblets chased with scenes of bull-hunting, and certain broken vases painted in a large bold style which remained an enigma until the excavation of Cnossus.
In 1890 and 1893, Staes cleared out certain, less rich dome-tombs at Thoricus in Attica; and other graves, either rock-cut "bee-hives" or chambers, were found at Spata and Aphidna in Attica, in Aegina and Salamis, at the Heraeum (see Argos) and Nauplia in the Argolid, near Thebes and Delphi, and not far from the Thessalian Larissa. During the Acropolis excavations in Athens, which terminated in 1888, many potsherds of the Mycenaean style were found; but Olympia had yielded either none, or such as had not been recognized before being thrown away, and the temple site at Delphi produced nothing distinctively Aegean. The American explorations of the Argive Heraeum, concluded in 1895, also failed to prove that site to have been important in the prehistoric time, though, as was to be expected from its neighbourhood to Mycenae itself, there were traces of occupation in the later Aegean periods. 
Prehistoric research had now begun to extend beyond the Greek mainland. Certain central Aegean islands, Antiparos, Ios, Amorgos, Syros and Siphnos, were all found to be singularly rich in evidence of the middle-Aegean period. The series of Syran built graves, containing crouching corpses, is the best and most representative that is known in the Legean. Melos, long marked as a source of early objects but not systematically excavated until taken in hand by the British School at Athens in 1896, yielded at Phylakope remains of all the Aegean periods, except the Neolithic.
A map of Cyprus in the later Bronze Age (such as is given by J. L. Myres and M. O. Richter in Catalogue of the Cyprus Museum) shows more than twenty-five settlements in and about the Mesaorea district alone, of which one, that at Enkomi, near the site of Salamis, has yielded the richest Aegean treasure in precious metal found outside Mycenae. E. Chantre in 1894 picked up lustreless ware, like that of Hissariik, in central Phtygia and at Pteria (q.v.), and the English archaeological expeditions, sent subsequently into north-western Anatolia, have never failed to bring back ceramic specimens of Aegean appearance from the valleys of the Rhyndncus, Sangarius and Halys.
In Egypt in 1887 W. M. F. Petrie found painted sherds of Cretan style at Kahun in the Faiyum, and farther up the Nile, at Tell el-Amarna, chanced on bits of no fewer than 800 Aegean vases in 1889. There have now been recognized in the collections at Cairo, Florence, London, Paris and Bologna several Egyptian imitations of the Aegean style which can be set off against the many debts which the centres of Aegean culture owed to Egypt. Two Aegean vases were found at Sidon in 1885, and many fragments of Aegean and especially Cypriote pottery have been turned up during recent excavations of sites in Philistia by the Palestine Fund.
Southeastern Sicily, ever since P. Orsi excavated the Sicel cemetery near Lentini in 1877, has proved a mine of early remains, among which appear in regular succession Aegean fabrics and motives of decoration from the period of the second stratum at Hissarlik. Sardinia has Aegean sites (e.g. at Abini near Teti) and Spain has yielded objects recognized as Aegean from tombs near Cadiz and from Saragossa.
One land, however, eclipsed all others in the Aegean by the wealth of its remains of all the prehistoric ages. Crete, for the present, must be regarded as the fountainhead of Aegean civilization, and probably for long its political and social centre. The island first attracted the notice of archaeologists by the remarkable archaic Greek bronzes found in a cave on Mount Ida in 1885, as well as by epigraphic monuments such as the famous law of Gortyna. However, the first undoubted Aegean remains reported from it were a few objects extracted from Knossos by Minos Kalokhairinos of Candia in 1878. These were followed by certain discoveries made in the S. plain Messara by F. Halbherr. Unsuccessful attempts at Cnossus were made by both W. J. Stillman and H. Schliemann, and A. J. Evans, coming on the scene in 1893, travelled in succeeding years about the island picking up trifles of unconsidered evidence, which gradually convinced him that greater things would eventually be found. He obtained enough to enable him to forecast the discovery of written characters, till then not suspected in Aegean civilization. The revolution of 1897 - 1898 opened the door to wider knowledge, and much exploration has ensued in Crete.
Thus the "Aegean Area" has now come to mean the Archipelago with Crete and Cyprus, the Hellenic peninsula with the Ionian islands, and Western Anatolia. Evidence is still wanting for the Macedonian and Thracian coasts. Offshoots are found in the western Mediterranean area, in Sicily, Italy, Sardinia and Spain, and in the eastern Mediterranean area in Syria and Egypt. About the Cyrenaica we are still insufficiently informed.

</doc>
<doc id="84976" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84976" title="Acmon">
Acmon

There are several characters named Acmon (Ἄκμων) in Greek mythology:

</doc>
<doc id="84979" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84979" title="Adeona">
Adeona

Adeona is a genus of bryozoan in the family Adeonidae. A typical example is the Australian species "Adeona cellulosa" that forms large colonies with bifoliate sheets containing numerous holes (fenestrae).

</doc>
<doc id="84980" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84980" title="Aeneads">
Aeneads

In Roman mythology, the Aeneads (Αἰνειάδαι in Greek) were the friends, family and companions of Aeneas, with whom they fled from Troy after the Trojan War. Aenides was another patronymic from Aeneas, which is applied by Gaius Valerius Flaccus to the inhabitants of Cyzicus, whose town was believed to have been founded by Cyzicus, the son of Aeneas and Aenete.Similarly, Aeneades (Ancient Greek: ) was a patronymic from Aeneas, and applied as a surname to those who were believed to have been descended from him, such as Ascanius, Augustus, and the Romans in general.
The Aeneads included:

</doc>
<doc id="84981" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84981" title="Aequitas">
Aequitas

Aequitas (genitive "aequitatis") is the Latin concept of justice, equality, conformity, symmetry, or fairness. It is the origin of the English word "equity". In ancient Rome, it could refer to either the legal concept of equity, or fairness between individuals.
Cicero defined "aequitas" as "tripartite": the first, he said, pertained to the gods above "(ad superos deos)" and is equivalent to "pietas", religious obligation; the second, to the Manes, the underworld spirits or spirits of the dead, and was "sanctitas", that which is sacred; and the third pertaining to human beings "(homines)" was "iustitia", "justice".
During the Roman Empire, Aequitas as a divine personification was part of the religious propaganda of the emperor, under the name "Aequitas Augusti", which also appeared on coins. She is depicted on coins holding a cornucopiae and a balance scale "(libra)", which was more often a symbol of "honest measure" to the Romans than of justice.

</doc>
<doc id="84983" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84983" title="Bucher's Mill Covered Bridge">
Bucher's Mill Covered Bridge

The Bucher's Mill Covered Bridge or Butcher's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Cocalico Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. After the Landis Mill Covered Bridge, it is the second shortest covered bridge in the county. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Cocalico #2 Bridge.
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-12. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003514. It is located at (40.20783, -76.134667) to the northeast of Ephrata, Pennsylvania off Pennsylvania Route 272 on Cocalico Creek Road.
History.
The Bucher's Mill Covered Bridge was built in 1891"Note:" by Elias McMellen, using single span, wooden, double Burr arch truss construction, at a cost of $1167. A year later, in 1892, the bridge was damaged heavily in a flood and was rebuilt by McMellen for $1025.

</doc>
<doc id="84984" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84984" title="Aeternitas">
Aeternitas

In ancient Roman religion, Aeternitas was the divine personification of eternity. She was particularly associated with Imperial cult as a virtue of the deified emperor "(divus)". The religious maintenance of abstract deities such as Aeternitas was characteristic of official Roman cult from the time of the Julio-Claudians to the Severans.
Like the more familiar anthropomorphic deities, Aeternitas and other abstractions were cultivated with sacrifices and temples, both in Rome and in the provinces. The temple of "Aeternitas Augusta" at Tarraco in Roman Spain was pictured on a coin.
The divinity sometimes appears as "Aeternitas Imperii" (the "Eternity of Roman rule"), where the Latin word "imperium" ("command, power") points toward the meaning "empire," the English word derived from it. "Aeternitas Imperii" was among the deities who received sacrifices from the Arval Brethren in a thanksgiving when Nero survived conspiracy and attempted assassination. New bronze coinage was issued at this time, on which various virtues were represented.
Aeternitas was among the many virtues depicted on coinage issued under Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Septimius Severus. The coins issued 75–79 AD under Vespasian show Aeternitas holding a head in each hand representing Sol and Luna. On the coins of Titus (80–81 AD), Aeternitas holds a cornucopia, leans on a scepter, and has one foot placed on a globe, imagery that links the concepts of eternity, prosperity, and world dominion. From the 2nd to the mid-3rd century, the iconography of Aeternitas includes the globe, celestial bodies (stars, or sun and moon), and the phoenix, a symbol of cyclical time, since the phoenix was reborn in flames every 500 years. Aeternitas sometimes holds the globe on which the phoenix perches.
In "The Marriage of Philology and Mercury", Martianus Capella says that Aeternitas is among the more honored of Jupiter's daughters. He mentions her diadem, the circular shape of which represents eternity.
The male equivalent of Aeternitas is Aion, the god of limitless time.

</doc>
<doc id="84986" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84986" title="Colemanville Covered Bridge">
Colemanville Covered Bridge

The Colemanville Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Pequea Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. After Hunsecker's Mill Covered Bridge, it is Lancaster County's second-longest single-span covered bridge still being used. It is also referred to as the Martic Forge Covered Bridge and Pequea #12 Bridge. 
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted red with white trim.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-26. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003534.
The bridge is located on Fox Hollow Road just south of Pennsylvania route 324 in Martic Township, Pennsylvania. It is located at (39.898892, -76.342194).
History.
The Colemanville Covered Bridge was originally built in 1856 by James C. Carpenter at a cost of $2,244. After being damaged twice by flooding, it was partially rebuilt in 1938 by Edmund Gardner and 1973 by David Esh. Lancaster county completely rebuilt the bridge in 1992 for $350,000. During the restoration process the bridge was raised by and moved west a few feet to protect it from damage in potential future flooding.

</doc>
<doc id="84987" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84987" title="Aius Locutius">
Aius Locutius

Aius Locutius (, spoken affirmation) or Aius Loquens (, speaking affirmation), was a Roman deity or numen associated with the Gallic invasions of Rome during the early 4th century BC.
According to legend, a Roman plebeian named M. Caedicius heard a supernatural, nocturnal voice that issued from Vesta's sacred grove, at the base of the Palatine hill. It warned him of an imminent Gaulish attack, recommended that the walls of Rome be fortified and instructed him to pass these messages on to the tribune of the plebs; but because of the messenger's humble station, the message was ignored. In consequence, the Gauls entered and burned the city (c. 391 BC). Once the Gauls were repelled, the senate built a temple and altar (known as "Ara Aius Locutius" or "Ara Saepta") to propitiate the unknown deity who had offered the warning. This was said to have been set up where Caedicius had heard the divine voice. Later Roman historians disputed its exact location and no trace remains of the temple or altar; the latter has been historically misidentified with the Palatine altar inscribed "si deus si dea" ("whether god or goddess"), in cautious dedication to some unknown deity.
In the broad context of official Roman religion, Aius Locutius is exceptional. Officially, the gods might speak through the cryptic writings and utterances of specialised oracles, or through a complex system of signs in answer to the specific questions of State augurs. They might also grant signs of fortune to their most favoured protégés, or speak privately to them in dreams. Aius Locutius gave clear, urgent instructions of great importance to the State, in everyday Latin, to an ordinary plebeian passer-by – and thereafter, according to Cicero, "having acquired a temple, an altar, and a name, 'Speaker' never spoke again".
The epithet "Locutius" was also used to invoke one of the deities concerned with child development.

</doc>
<doc id="84989" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84989" title="Jackson's Sawmill Covered Bridge">
Jackson's Sawmill Covered Bridge

The Jackson's Sawmill Covered Bridge or Eichelberger's Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans the West Branch of the Octoraro Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the West Octoraro #1 Bridge. The bridge is purportedly the only covered bridge in the county that is not built perpendicular to the stream it crosses due to the placement of the sawmill on one side of the bridge and the rock formations faced by the builders on the other side.
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-33. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003520, but it was removed from the Register in 1986 It is located at (39.89700, -76.08000). The bridge lies in Bart Township, 3.25 mi (5.2 km) to the east of Quarryville and 1.5 mi (2.4 km) south of Pennsylvania Route 372 on Mt Pleasant Road. Due to its remote location in an isolated part of the county, it is seen less than many of the county's other covered bridges that are closer to the major populations centers such as Lancaster.
History.
The bridge was built in 1878 by John Smith and Samuel Stauffer at a cost of $2,410. In 1985 it was washed mostly in tact from it's foundations and deposited a short distance downstream in a flood. It was repaired and reset at a cost to the county of $75,000. During the rebuilding, the bridge was raised 3 feet (1 m) to protect it against future flooding. As of the summer of 2006, the bridge was in good conditions having undergone a recent rehabilitation in May 2005.

</doc>
<doc id="84996" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84996" title="Abdera">
Abdera

Abdera may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="84997" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84997" title="Forry's Mill Covered Bridge">
Forry's Mill Covered Bridge

The Forry's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Chiques Creek in West Hempfield in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Big Chiques #7 Bridge. ("Chiques Creek" was known as "Chickies Creek" until 2002).
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-28. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003512. It is located at (40.06767, -76.47800).
Forry's Mill Covered Bridge is located in West Hempfield Township on Bridge Valley Road 0.4 km (0.25 mi) north of Pennsylvania route 23 5.5 km (3.4 mi) east of Marietta, less than a mile away from the former site of the Siegrist's Mill Covered Bridge.
History.
Forry's Mill Covered Bridge was originally built in 1869 by Elias McMellen for a cost of $2969. The bridge required repairs in 1925 to its sides and floor.

</doc>
<doc id="84998" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84998" title="Herr's Mill Covered Bridge">
Herr's Mill Covered Bridge

The Herr's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Pequea Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. It is also sometimes known as Soudersburg Bridge.
The bridge has a double span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design. It is painted red on the outside, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-21. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003537. It is located at (40.00983, -76.16217). It is located in Paradise Township on Ronks Road 0.4 km (0.25 mi) south of U.S. Route 30 to the east of Lancaster city.
History.
Herr's Mill Covered Bridge was built in 1844 by Joseph Elliot and Robert Russell at a cost of $1787. It has a double-span, double-arch Burr arch truss construction. In 1875 the bridge was rebuilt by James C. Carpenter at a cost of $1860. The bridge was later bypassed by a new concrete bridge and is now on the private property of the Mill Bridge Village Camping Resort. Owner Brian Kopan was quoted as saying "The bridge is in fine condition. We’re hoping to keep it as it is."

</doc>
<doc id="85001" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85001" title="Hunsecker's Mill Covered Bridge">
Hunsecker's Mill Covered Bridge

The Hunsecker's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge located in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design. The bridge, which spans the Conestoga River, is 180 feet (54.9 m) long, making it the longest single span covered bridge in the county.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-06. Unlike most historic covered bridges in the county, it is not listed on the National Register of Historic Places. It is located at (40.08717, -76.24750). The bridge is approximately one mile southeast of Pennsylvania Route 272 and is 0.5 miles (0.8 km) north of Pennsylvania Route 23 off Mondale Road on Hunsecker Road, just west of the community of Hunsecker. The bridge divides the road on which it is upon into Hunsecker Road (East) in Upper Leacock Township and Hunsicker Road (West) in Manheim Township.
History.
The original bridge was built in 1843 by John Russell at a cost of $1,988. It was and is a double Burr Arch truss system. It has been swept away in flooding numerous times, most recently in 1972 after Hurricane Agnes. Waters lifted the original structure off its abutments and carried it downstream. In 1973, following destruction from the hurricane, it was rebuilt at a cost of $321,302."Note:" Its length of 180 feet makes it the longest single-span covered bridge in the county.

</doc>
<doc id="85003" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85003" title="Amata">
Amata

Amata (also called Palanto), in Roman mythology, was the wife of King Latinus of the Latins. She and Latinus had a daughter Lavinia, and no sons. 
When the hero Aeneas sued for Lavinia's hand in marriage, Amata opposed him because she had already promised Lavinia to Aeneas' nemesis Turnus. At the same time, she was instigated by Alecto, who acted according to the request of the goddess Juno. 
Hiding her daughter in the woods and arousing the womenfolk of the Latins, managed to stir up the war between the people of King Mezentius, the Etruscans (now allied with Turnus) and Aeneas' Trojans (allied with King Evander's people and the Aborigines). This story fills the greater part of the seventh book of Virgil's "Aeneid". When Amata was informed that Turnus had fallen in battle, she hanged herself.

</doc>
<doc id="85004" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85004" title="Kauffman's Distillery Covered Bridge">
Kauffman's Distillery Covered Bridge

The Kauffman's Distillery Covered Bridge or Sporting Hill Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Chiques Creek in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Big Chiques #1 Bridge. ("Chiques Creek" was known as "Chickies Creek" until 2002)
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in the traditional white color.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-32. In 1980 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places as structure number 80003529. It is located at (40.14817, -76.40983). The bridge is located southwest of Manheim between Rapho and Penn Townships 0.15 miles (0.24 km) southeast of Pennsylvania Route 772 and 1.4 miles (2.25 km) west of Pennsylvania Route 72 on Sun Hill Road.
History.
Kauffman's Distillery Covered Bridge was originally built in 1857 at a cost of $1,185 by James C. Carpenter. The bridge was named after the Kauffman's Distillery Mill which operated in the late 1800s. In 1874 the bridge was rebuilt by Elias McMellen at a cost of $1,620.

</doc>
<doc id="85005" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85005" title="Keller's Mill Covered Bridge">
Keller's Mill Covered Bridge

The Keller's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Cocalico Creek in Ephrata Township, Lancaster County in the US state of Pennsylvania. A county-owned and maintained bridge, its official designation is the Cocalico No. 5 Bridge. It is also sometimes known as Guy Bard Covered Bridge (after a local jurist) and Rettew's Covered Bridge (after the person that Rettew's Road is named).
Due to heavy road traffic on the aging, one-lane bridge, construction on a new steel and concrete bridge to bypass the covered bridge occurred in the summer of 2006. According to Ephrata Township supervisor Clark Stauffer, the bridge has been disassembled and will be reassembled a few miles downstream to replace an existing one lane Mill Creek Road bridge. It was located at (40.16983, −76.20467) before being disassembled.
History.
Keller's Mill Covered Bridge was originally built by Elias McMellen in 1873 at a cost of US$2,075. After being swept away in flooding, the bridge was rebuilt in 1891, again by McMellen. It stayed there until it was disassembled and moved in 2006. The bridge was reopened on Middle Creek Road in December 2010.
Design.
Keller's Mill Covered Bridge has a single span, wooden, double Burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. The bridge is the only all white bridge in the county, the only bridge to have survived the transition from whitewashing to the red color commonly used in barns throughout the county. The bridge is not painted on the inside.
Rebuilt in 2010

</doc>
<doc id="85007" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85007" title="Kurtz's Mill Covered Bridge">
Kurtz's Mill Covered Bridge

The Kurtz's Mill Covered Bridge is a covered bridge that spans Mill Creek in the Lancaster County Park in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, United States. The bridge is also known as the County Park Covered Bridge, Baer's Mill Covered Bridge, Isaac Baer’s Mill Bridge, Keystone Mill Covered Bridge, Binder Tongue Carrier Covered Bridge, and Mill 2A Covered Bridge. The bridge is accessible to road traffic from within the park. 
The bridge has a single span, wooden, double burr arch trusses design with the addition of steel hanger rods. The deck is made from oak planks. It is painted red, the traditional color of Lancaster County covered bridges, on both the inside and outside. Both approaches to the bridge are painted in red with white trim.
The bridge's WGCB Number is 38-36-03. Unlike most historic covered bridges in the county, it is not listed on the National Register of Historic Places. It is located at (40.0151, -76.2822).
History.
The bridge was built in 1876 by W. W. Upp over the Conestoga River. In 1972, it was damaged by the floodwaters caused by Hurricane Agnes. It was repaired by David Esh in 1975 and moved to its present location in the Lancaster County Park over Mill Creek, a tributary of the Conestoga River.

</doc>
<doc id="85009" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85009" title="Booch">
Booch

Booch may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="85010" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85010" title="Catia">
Catia

Catia may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="85011" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85011" title="XPointer">
XPointer

XPointer is a system for addressing components of XML based Internet media. It is divided among four specifications: a "framework" that forms the basis for identifying XML fragments, a positional element addressing scheme, a scheme for namespaces, and a scheme for XPath-based addressing. XPointer Framework is a W3C recommendation since March 2003.
The XPointer language is designed to address structural aspects of XML, including text content and other information objects created as a result of parsing the document. Thus, it could be used to point to a section of a document highlighted by a user through a mouse drag action.
XPointer is covered by a royalty-free technology patent held by Sun Microsystems.
Positional Element Addressing.
The codice_1 scheme introduces positional addressing of child elements. This is similar to a simple XPath address, but subsequent steps can only be numbers representing the position of a descendant relative to its branch on the tree.
For instance, given the following fragment:
results as the following examples:

</doc>
<doc id="85012" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85012" title="Sewing machine">
Sewing machine

A sewing machine is a machine used to stitch fabric and other materials together with thread. Sewing machines were invented during the first Industrial Revolution to decrease the amount of manual sewing work performed in clothing companies. Since the invention of the first working sewing machine, generally considered to have been the work of Englishman Thomas Saint in 1790, the sewing machine has greatly improved the efficiency and productivity of the clothing industry.
Home sewing machines are designed for one person to sew individual items while using a single stitch type. In a modern sewing machine the fabric easily glides in and out of the machine without the inconvenience of needles and thimbles and other such tools used in hand sewing, automating the process of stitching and saving time.
Industrial sewing machines, by contrast to domestic machines, are larger, faster, and more varied in their size, cost, appearance, and task.
History.
Invention.
Charles Fredrick Wiesenthal, a German-born engineer working in England was awarded the first British patent for a mechanical device to aid the art of sewing, in 1755. His invention consisted of a double pointed needle with an eye at one end.
In 1790, the English inventor Thomas Saint invented the first sewing machine design, but he did not successfully advertise or market his invention. His machine was meant to be used on leather and canvas material. It is likely that Saint had a working model but there is no evidence of one; he was a skilled cabinet maker and his device included many practically functional features: an overhanging arm, a feed mechanism (adequate for short lengths of leather), a vertical needle bar, and a looper.
His sewing machine used the chain stitch method, in which the machine uses a single thread to make simple stitches in the fabric. A stitching awl would pierce the material and a forked point rod would carry the thread through the hole where it would be hooked underneath and moved to the next stitching place, where the cycle would be repeated, locking the stitch. Saint's machine was designed to aid the manufacture of various leather goods, including saddles and bridles, but it was also capable of working with canvas, and was used for sewing ship sails. Although his machine was very advanced for the era, the concept would need steady improvement over the coming decades before it could become a practical proposition. In 1874, a sewing machine manufacturer, William Newton Wilson, found Saint's drawings in the London Patent Office, made adjustments to the looper, and built a working machine, currently owned by the London Science Museum.
In 1804, a sewing machine was built by the Englishmen Thomas Stone and James Henderson, and a machine for embroidering was constructed by John Duncan in Scotland. An Austrian tailor, Josef Madersperger, began developing his first sewing machine in 1807. He presented his first working machine in 1814.
The first practical and widely used sewing machine was invented by Barthélemy Thimonnier, a French tailor, in 1829. His machine sewed straight seams using chain stitch like Saint's model, and in 1830, he signed a contract with Auguste Ferrand, a mining engineer, who made the requisite drawings and submitted a patent application. The patent for his machine was issued on 17 July 1830, and in the same year, he opened (with partners) the first machine-based clothing manufacturing company in the world to create army uniforms for the French Army. However, the factory was burned down, reportedly by workers fearful of losing their livelihood following the issuing of the patent.
A model of the machine is exhibited at the London Science Museum. The machine is made of wood and uses a barbed needle which passes downward through the cloth to grab the thread and pull it up to form a loop to be locked by the next loop. The first American lockstitch sewing machine was invented by Walter Hunt in 1832. His machine used an eye-pointed needle (with the eye and the point on the same end) carrying the upper thread and a falling shuttle carrying the lower thread. The curved needle moved through the fabric horizontally, leaving the loop as it withdrew. The shuttle passed through the loop, interlocking the thread. The feed let the machine down, requiring the machine to be stopped frequently and reset up. Hunt eventually lost interest in his machine and sold it without bothering to patent it. In 1842, John Greenough patented the first sewing machine in the United States. The British partners Newton and Archibold introduced the eye-pointed needle and the use of two pressing surfaces to keep the pieces of fabric in position, in 1841.
The first machine to combine all the disparate elements of the previous half-century of innovation into the modern sewing machine was the device built by English inventor John Fisher in 1844, built by Isaac Merritt Singer, in 1851 and Elias Howe, in 1845. However, due to the botched filing of Fisher's patent at the Patent Office, he did not receive due recognition for the modern sewing machine in the legal disputations of priority between the two Americans.
Industrial competition.
Elias Howe, born in Spencer, Massachusetts, created his sewing machine in 1845, using a similar method to Fisher's except that the fabric was held vertically. An important improvement on his machine was to have the needle running away from the point, starting from the eye. After a lengthy stay in England trying to attract interest in his machine, he returned to America to find various people infringing his patent, among them Isaac Merritt Singer. He eventually won a case for patent infringement in 1854, and was awarded the right to claim royalties from the manufacturers using ideas covered by his patent, including Singer.
Singer had seen a rotary sewing machine being repaired in a Boston shop. As an engineer, he thought it was clumsy and decided to design a better one. The machine he devised used a falling shuttle instead of a rotary one; the needle was mounted vertically and included a presser foot to hold the cloth in place. It had a fixed arm to hold the needle and included a basic tension system. This machine combined elements of Thimonnier, Hunt and Howe's machines. Singer was granted an American patent in 1851, and it was suggested he patent the foot pedal or treadle, used to power some of his machines; unfortunately, the foot pedal had been in use too long for a patent to be issued. When Howe learned of Singer's machine he took him to court, where Howe won and Singer was forced to pay a lump sum for all machines already produced. Singer then took out a license under Howe's patent and paid him $1.15 per machine before entering into a joint partnership with a lawyer named Edward Clark. They created the first hire-purchase arrangement to allow people to buy their machines through payments over time.
Meanwhile, Allen B. Wilson developed a shuttle that reciprocated in a short arc, which was an improvement over Singer and Howe's. However, John Bradshaw had patented a similar device and threatened to sue, so Wilson decided to try a new method. He went into partnership with Nathaniel Wheeler to produce a machine with a rotary hook instead of a shuttle. This was far quieter and smoother than other methods, with the result that the Wheeler & Wilson Company produced more machines in the 1850s and 1860s than any other manufacturer. Wilson also invented the four-motion feed mechanism that is still seen on every sewing machine today. This had a forward, down, back and up motion, which drew the cloth through in an even and smooth motion. Charles Miller patented the first machine to stitch buttonholes. Throughout the 1850s more and more companies were being formed, each trying to sue the others for patent infringement. This triggered a patent thicket known as the Sewing Machine War.
In 1856, the Sewing Machine Combination was formed, consisting of Singer, Howe, Wheeler, Wilson, Grover and Baker. These four companies pooled their patents, with the result that all other manufacturers had to obtain a license and pay $15 per machine. This lasted until 1877, when the last patent expired. James Edward Allen Gibbs (1829–1902), a farmer from Raphine in Rockbridge County, Virginia patented the first chain stitch single-thread sewing machine on June 2, 1857. In partnership with James Willcox, Gibbs became a principal partner in Willcox & Gibbs Sewing Machine Company.
Willcox & Gibbs commercial sewing machines are still used in the 21st century.
Spread and maturation.
William Jones started making sewing machines in 1859 and in 1860 formed a partnership with Thomas Chadwick. As Chadwick & Jones, they manufactured sewing machines at Ashton-under-Lyne, England until 1863. Their machines used designs from Howe and Wilson produced under licence. Thomas Chadwick later joined Bradbury & Co. William Jones opened a factory in Guide Bridge, Manchester in 1869. In 1893 a Jones advertising sheet claimed that this factory was the "Largest Factory in England Exclusively Making First Class Sewing Machines". The firm was renamed as the Jones Sewing Machine Co. Ltd and was later acquired by Brother Industries of Japan, in 1968.
Clothing manufacturers were the first sewing machine customers, and used them to produce the first ready-to-wear clothing and shoes. In the 1860s consumers began purchasing them, and the machines—ranging in price from £6 to £15 in Britain depending on features—became very common in middle-class homes. Owners were much more likely to spend free time with their machines to make and mend clothing for their families than to visit friends, and women's magazines and household guides such as "Mrs Beeton's" offered dress patterns and instructions. A sewing machine could produce a man's shirt in about one hour, compared to 14 1/2 hours by hand.
In 1877 the world's first crochet machine was invented and patented by Joseph M. Merrow, then-president of what had started in the 1840s as a machine shop to develop specialized machinery for the knitting operations. This crochet machine was the first production overlock sewing machine. The Merrow Machine Company went on to become one of the largest American Manufacturers of overlock sewing machines, and continues to be a global presence in the 21st century as the last American over-lock sewing machine manufacturer.
In 1885 Singer patented the Singer Vibrating Shuttle sewing machine, which used Allen B. Wilson's idea for a vibrating shuttle and was a better lockstitcher than the oscillating shuttles of the time. Millions of the machines, perhaps the world's first really practical sewing machine for domestic use, were produced until finally superseded by rotary shuttle machines in the 20th century. Sewing machines continued being made to roughly the same design, with more lavish decoration appearing until well into the 1900s.
The first electric machines were developed by Singer Sewing Co. and introduced in 1889. By the end of the First World War, Singer was offering hand, treadle and electric machines for sale. At first the electric machines were standard machines with a motor strapped on the side, but as more homes gained power, they became more popular and the motor was gradually introduced into the casing.
Design.
Stitches.
Sewing machines can make a great variety of plain or patterned stitches. Ignoring strictly decorative aspects, over three dozen distinct stitch formations are formally recognized by the ISO 4915:1991 standard, involving one to seven separate threads to form the stitch.
Plain stitches fall into four general categories: chainstitch, lockstitch, overlock, and coverstitch.
Chainstitch.
Chainstitch was used by early sewing machines and has two major drawbacks:
A better stitch was found in the lockstitch. The chainstitch is still used today in clothing manufacture, though due to its major drawback it is generally paired with an overlock stitch along the same seam.
Lockstitch.
Lockstitch is the familiar stitch performed by most household sewing machines and most industrial "single needle" sewing machines from two threads, one passed through a needle and one coming from a bobbin or shuttle. Each thread stays on the same side of the material being sewn, interlacing with the other thread at each needle hole by means of a bobbin driver. As a result, a lockstitch can be formed anywhere on the material being sewn; it does not need to be near an edge.
Overlock.
Overlock, also known as "serging" or "serger stitch", can be formed with one to four threads, one or two needles, and one or two loopers. Overlock sewing machines are usually equipped with knives that trim or create the edge immediately in front of the stitch formation. Household and industrial overlock machines are commonly used for garment seams in knit or stretchy fabrics, for garment seams where the fabric is light enough that the seam does not need to be pressed open, and for protecting edges against raveling. Machines using two to four threads are most common, and frequently one machine can be configured for several varieties of overlock stitch. Overlock machines with five or more threads usually make both a chainstitch with one needle and one looper, and an overlock stitch with the remaining needles and loopers. This combination is known as a "safety stitch". A similar machine used for stretch fabrics is called a "mock safety".
Coverstitch.
Coverstitch is formed by two or more needles and one or two loopers. Like lockstitch and chainstitch, coverstitch can be formed anywhere on the material being sewn. One looper manipulates a thread below the material being sewn, forming a bottom cover stitch against the needle threads. An additional looper above the material can form a top cover stitch simultaneously. The needle threads form parallel rows, while the looper threads cross back and forth all the needle rows. Coverstitch is so-called because the grid of crossing needle and looper threads covers raw seam edges, much as the overlock stitch does. It is widely used in garment construction, particularly for attaching trims and flat seaming where the raw edges can be finished in the same operation as forming the seam.
Zigzag stitch.
A zigzag stitch is a variant geometry of the lockstitch. It is a back-and-forth stitch used where a straight stitch will not suffice, such as in preventing raveling of a fabric, in stitching stretchable fabrics, and in temporarily joining two work pieces edge-to-edge.
When creating a zigzag stitch, the back-and-forth motion of the sewing machine's needle is controlled by a cam. As the cam rotates, a fingerlike follower, connected to the needle bar, rides along the cam and tracks its indentations. As the follower moves in and out, the needle bar is moved from side to side. Very old sewing machines lack this hardware and so cannot natively produce a zigzag stitch, but there are often shank-driven attachments available which enable them to do so.
Feed mechanisms.
Besides the basic motion of needles, loopers and bobbins, the material being sewn must move so that each cycle of needle motion involves a different part of the material. This motion is known as feed, and sewing machines have almost as many ways of feeding material as they do of forming stitches. For general categories, there are: drop feed, needle feed, walking foot, puller, and manual. Often, multiple types of feed are used on the same machine. Besides these general categories, there are also uncommon feed mechanisms used in specific applications like edge joining fur, making seams on caps, and blindstitching.
Drop feed.
The drop feed mechanism is used by almost all household machines and involves a mechanism below the sewing surface of the machine. When the needle is withdrawn from the material being sewn, a set of "feed dogs" is pushed up through slots in the machine surface, then dragged horizontally past the needle. The dogs are serrated to grip the material, and a "presser foot" is used to keep the material in contact with the dogs. At the end of their horizontal motion, the dogs are lowered again and returned to their original position while the needle makes its next pass through the material. While the needle is in the material, there is no feed action. Almost all household machines and the majority of industrial machines use drop feed. Differential feed is a variation of drop feed with two independent sets of dogs, one before and one after the needle. By changing their relative motions, these sets of dogs can be used to stretch or compress the material in the vicinity of the needle. This is extremely useful when sewing stretchy material, and overlock machines (heavily used for such materials) frequently have differential feed.
Needle feed.
A needle feed, used only in industrial machines, moves the material while the needle is in the material. In fact, the needle may be the primary feeding force. Some implementations of needle feed rock the axis of needle motion back and forth, while other implementations keep the axis vertical while moving it forward and back. In both cases, there is no feed action while the needle is out of the material. Needle feed is often used in conjunction with a modified drop feed, and is very common on industrial two needle machines. Household machines do not use needle feed as a general rule.
Walking foot.
A walking foot replaces the stationary presser foot with one that moves along with whatever other feed mechanisms the machine already has. As the walking foot moves, it shifts the workpiece along with it. It is most useful for sewing heavy materials where needle feed is mechanically inadequate, for spongy or cushioned materials where lifting the foot out of contact with the material helps in the feeding action, and for sewing many layers together where a drop feed will cause the lower layers to shift out of position with the upper layers.
Puller feed.
Some factory machines and a few household machines are set up with an auxiliary "puller feed", which grips the material being sewn (usually from behind the needles) and pulls it with a force and reliability usually not possible with other types of feed. Puller feeds are seldom built directly into the basic sewing machine. Their action must be synchronized with the needle and feed action built into the machine to avoid damaging the machine. Pullers are also limited to straight seams, or very nearly so. Despite their additional cost and limitations, pulling feeds are very useful when making large heavy items like tents and vehicle covers.
Manual feed.
A manual feed is used primarily in freehand embroidery, quilting, and shoe repair. With manual feed, the stitch length and direction is controlled entirely by the motion of the material being sewn. Frequently some form of hoop or stabilizing material is used with fabric to keep the material under proper tension and aid in moving it around. Most household machines can be set for manual feed by disengaging the drop feed dogs. Most industrial machines can not be used for manual feed without actually removing the feed dogs.
Needles.
Sewing machines use special needles tailored to their needs and to the character of the material being sewn.
Industrial vs domestic.
Industrial sewing machines are larger, faster, and more varied in their size, cost, appearance, and task. Industrial machines, unlike domestic machines, perform a single dedicated task and are capable of long hours of usage and as such have larger moving parts and comparatively much larger motors. Industrial machines are also more generic; a motor for almost any type of machine can work on any brand. Overlocker or straight-stitch machine motors are the same. Sewing feet and bobbins between brands are also interchangeable. However, with domestic machines the motor, and to a lesser extent bobbins and sewing feet, are brand specific.
The motors on industrial machines, as with most of their components, lights, etc., are separate, usually mounted to the underside of the table. Domestic machines have their OEM motors mounted inside the machine. Industrial machines usually have two types of motors: a servo motor (which use less electricity and are silent when not in use), and the more traditional clutch motor (which is always spinning; even when not in use).
Social impact.
Before sewing machines were invented women spent much of their time maintaining their family's clothing. Middle-class housewives, even with the aid of a hired seamstress, would devote several days of each month to this task. It took an experienced seamstress at least 14 hours to make a dress shirt for a man; a woman's dress took 10 hours; and a pair of summer pants took nearly three hours. Most individuals would have only two sets of clothing: a work outfit and a Sunday outfit.
Sewing machines reduced the time for making a dress shirt to an hour and 15 minutes; the time to make a dress to an hour; and the time for a pair of summer pants to 38 minutes. This reduced labor resulted in women having a diminished role in household management, and allowed more hours for their own leisure as well as the ability to seek more employment.
Industrial use of sewing machines further reduced the burden placed upon housewives, moving clothing production from housewives and seamstresses to large-scale factories. The movement to large-scale factories also resulted in a decrease in the amount of time clothing production took, which caused the prices for clothing to drop significantly. This is because manufacturers were able to decrease the number of workers needed to produce the same amount of clothing, resulting in reduced costs. Increased supply also lowered the cost.
The initial effects of sewing machines on workers were both positive and negative, however in the long run the negative effects decreased. Many of the women who had previously been busy at home could now seek employment in factories, increasing the income for their family. This allowed for families to be able to afford more sets of clothing and items than they previously could. For seamstresses, home sewing machines allowed them to produce clothing for the average person during periods when demand for fitted clothes was low, effectively increasing their earnings. When industrial sewing machines initially became popular many seamstresses working in factories as well as those working at home lost their jobs as it meant that fewer workers could produce the same output. In the long run these now unemployed workers along with thousands of men and children would eventually be able to gain employment in jobs created as the clothing industry grew.
The sewing machine's effects on the clothing industry resulted in major changes for other industries as well. Cotton production needed to increase in order to match the demand of the new clothing factories. As a result, cotton became planted in new areas where it hadn't previously been farmed. Other industries involved in the process benefited as well such as metal companies who provided for parts of the machines and shippers to move the increased amounts of goods. Gun makers visited clothing factories in order to perfect their own mass production techniques. In addition to being important for clothing production, sewing machines also became important in the manufacturing of furniture with upholstery, curtains and towels, toys, books, and many other products.
Variations.
There are other variations of sewing machines aside from purely human-driven ones. These include:
Manufacturers.
Not included in list of above category link includes:

</doc>
<doc id="85016" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85016" title="Rhea Silvia">
Rhea Silvia

Rhea Silvia (also written as Rea Silvia), and also known as Ilia , was the mythical mother of the twins Romulus and Remus, who founded the city of Rome. Her story is told in the of "Ab Urbe Condita" of Livy and in fragments from Ennius, "Annales" and Fabius Pictor.
The legend.
According to Livy's account of the legend she was the daughter of Numitor, king of Alba Longa, and descended from Aeneas. Numitor's younger brother Amulius seized the throne and killed Numitor's son, then forced Rhea Silvia to become a Vestal Virgin, a priestess of the goddess Vesta. As Vestal Virgins were sworn to celibacy for a period of thirty years, this would ensure the line of Numitor had no heirs.
However, Rhea Silvia conceived and gave birth to the twins Romulus and Remus. She claimed that the god Mars was the father of the children. Livy says that she was raped by an unknown man, but "declared Mars to be the father of her illegitimate offspring, either because she really imagined it to be the case, or because it was less discreditable to have committed such an offence with a god."
When Amulius learned of the birth he imprisoned Rhea Silvia and ordered a servant to kill the twins. But the servant showed mercy and set them adrift on the river Tiber, which, overflowing, left the infants in a pool by the bank. There a she-wolf ("lupa"), who had just lost her own cubs, suckled them. Subsequently Faustulus rescued the boys, to be raised by his wife Larentia. The god of the Tiber, Tiberinus, rescued Rhea Silvia and took her to be his bride.
Romulus and Remus went on to found Rome, overthrow Amulius, and reinstate Numitor as King of Alba Longa.
In Roman art and literature.
Despite Livy's euhemerist and realist deflation of this myth, it is clear that the story of her seduction by Mars continued to be widely accepted. This is demonstrated by the recurring theme of Mars discovering Rhea Silvia in Roman arts: in bas-relief on the Casali Altar (Vatican Museums), in engraved couched glass on the Portland Vase (British Museum), or on a sarcophagus in the Palazzo Mattei. Mars' discovery of Rhea Silvia is a prototype of the "invention scene", or "discovery scene" familiar in Roman art; Greek examples are furnished by Dionysus and Ariadne or Selene and Endymion. The Portland Vase features a scene that has been interpreted as a depiction of the "invention", or coming-upon, of Rhea Sylvia by Mars.
In a version presented by Ovid, it is the river Anio who takes pity on her and invites her to rule in his realm.
Etymology.
The name Rhea Silvia suggests a minor deity, a demi-goddess of forests. "Silva" means woods or forest, and "Rea" may be related to "res" and "regnum"; "Rea" may also be related to Greek "rheô", "flow," and thus relate to her association with the spirit of the river Tiber or Greek goddess Rhea. Carsten Niebuhr proposed that the name Rhea Silvia came from "Rea", meaning "guilty", and "Silvia" meaning "of the forest" and so assumed that Rhea Silvia was a generic name for "the guilty woman of the forest", i.e. the woman who had been seduced there.

</doc>
<doc id="85017" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85017" title="List of battles 1901–2000">
List of battles 1901–2000

List of battles: before 301;  301–1300; 1301–1800; 1801–1900; 1901–2000; 2001–current
1976–2000.
List of battles: before 301;  301–1300; 1301–1800; 1801–1900; 1901–2000; 2001–current

</doc>
