<doc id="83060" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83060" title="Magnetometer">
Magnetometer

Magnetometers are measurement instruments used for two general purposes: to measure the magnetization of a magnetic material like a ferromagnet, or to measure the strength and, in some cases, the direction of the magnetic field at a point in space.
The first magnetometer was invented by Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1833 and notable developments in the 19th century included the Hall Effect which is still widely used.
Magnetometers are widely used for measuring the Earth's magnetic field and in geophysical surveys to detect magnetic anomalies of various types. They are also used in the military to detect submarines. Consequently, some countries, such as the USA, Canada and Australia, classify the more sensitive magnetometers as military technology, and control their distribution.
Magnetometers can be used as metal detectors: they can detect only magnetic (ferrous) metals, but can detect such metals at a much larger depth than conventional metal detectors; they are capable of detecting large objects, such as cars, at tens of metres, while a metal detector's range is rarely more than 2 metres.
In recent years, magnetometers have been miniaturized to the extent that they can be incorporated in integrated circuits at very low cost and are finding increasing use as compasses in consumer devices such as mobile phones and tablet computers.
Introduction.
Magnetic fields.
Magnetic fields are vector quantities characterized by both strength and direction. The strength of a magnetic field is measured in units of tesla in the SI units, and in gauss in the cgs system of units. 10,000 gauss are equal to one tesla. Measurements of the Earth's magnetic field are often quoted in units of nanotesla (nT), also called a gamma. The Earth's magnetic field can vary from 20,000 to 80,000 nT depending on location, fluctuations in the Earth's magnetic field are on the order of 100 nT, and magnetic field variations due to magnetic anomalies can be in the picotesla (pT) range. "Gaussmeters" and "teslameters" are magnetometers that measure in units of gauss or tesla, respectively. In some contexts, magnetometer is the term used for an instrument that measures fields of less than 1 millitesla (mT) and gaussmeter is used for those measuring greater than 1 mT.
Types of magnetometer.
There are two basic types of magnetometer measurement. "Vector magnetometers" measure the vector components of a magnetic field. "Total field magnetometers" or "scalar magnetometers" measure the magnitude of the vector magnetic field. Magnetometers used to study the Earth's magnetic field may express the vector components of the field in terms of "declination" (the angle between the horizontal component of the field vector and magnetic north) and the "inclination" (the angle between the field vector and the horizontal surface).
"Absolute magnetometers" measure the absolute magnitude or vector magnetic field, using an internal calibration or known physical constants of the magnetic sensor. "Relative magnetometers" measure magnitude or vector magnetic field relative to a fixed but uncalibrated baseline. Also called "variometers", relative magnetometers are used to measure variations in magnetic field.
Magnetometers may also be classified by their situation or intended use. "Stationary magnetometers" are installed to a fixed position and measurements are taken while the magnetometer is stationary. "Portable" or "mobile magnetometers" are meant to be used while in motion and may be manually carried or transported in a moving vehicle. "Laboratory magnetometers" are used to measure the magnetic field of materials placed within them and are typically stationary. "Survey magnetometers" are used to measure magnetic fields in geomagnetic surveys; they may be fixed base stations, as in the INTERMAGNET network, or mobile magnetometers used to scan a geographic region.
Performance and capabilities.
The performance and capabilities of magnetometers are described through their technical specifications. Major specifications include
Early magnetometers.
In 1833, Carl Friedrich Gauss, head of the Geomagnetic Observatory in Göttingen, published a paper on measurement of the Earth's magnetic field. It described a new instrument that consisted of a permanent bar magnet suspended horizontally from a gold fibre. The difference in the oscillations when the bar was magnetised and when it was demagnetised allowed Gauss to calculate an absolute value for the strength of the Earth's magnetic field.
The gauss, the CGS unit of magnetic flux density was named in his honour, defined as one maxwell per square centimeter; it equals 1×10−4 teslas (the SI unit).
Laboratory magnetometers.
Laboratory magnetometers measure the magnetization, also known as the magnetic moment of a sample material. Unlike survey magnetometers, laboratory magnetometers require the sample to be placed inside the magnetometer, and often the temperature, magnetic field, and other parameters of the sample can be controlled. A sample’s magnetization, is primarily dependent on the ordering of unpaired electrons within its atoms, with smaller contributions from nuclear magnetic moments, Larmor diamagnetism, among others. Ordering of magnetic moments are primarily classified as diamagnetic, paramagnetic, ferromagnetic, or antiferromagnetic (although the zoology of magnetic ordering also includes ferrimagnetic, helimagnetic, toroidal, spin glasses, etc.). Measuring the magnetization as a function of temperature and magnetic field can give clues as to the type of magnetic ordering, as well as any phase transitions between different types of magnetic orders that occur at critical temperatures or magnetic fields. This type of magnetometry measurement is very important to understand the magnetic properties of materials in physics, chemistry, geophysics and geology, as well as sometimes biology.
SQUID (Superconducting quantum interference device).
SQUIDs are a type of magnetometer used both as survey and as laboratory magnetometers. SQUID magnetometry is an extremely sensitive absolute magnetometry technique. However SQUIDs are noise sensitive, making them impractical as laboratory magnetometers in high DC magnetic fields, and in pulsed magnets. Commercial SQUID magnetometers are available for temperatures between 300 mK and 400 kelvins, and magnetic fields up to 7 teslas.
Inductive Pickup Coils.
Inductive pickup coils measure the magnetization by detecting the current induced in a coil due to the changing magnetic moment of the sample. The sample’s magnetization can be changed by applying a small ac magnetic field (or a rapidly changing dc field), as occurs in capacitor-driven pulsed magnets. These measurements require differentiating between the magnetic field produced by the sample and that from the external applied field. Often a special arrangement of cancellation coils is used. For example, half of the pickup coil is wound in one direction, and the other half in the other direction, and the sample is placed in only one half. The external uniform magnetic field will be detected by both halves of the coil and since they are counterwound the external magnetic field produces no net signal.
VSM (Vibrating Sample Magnetometer).
VSM (vibrating sample magnetometers) detect the magnetization of a sample by mechanically vibrating the sample inside of an inductive pickup coil or inside of a SQUID coil. Induced current or changing flux in the coil is measured. The vibration is typically created by a motor or a piezoelectric actuator. Typically the VSM technique is about an order of magnitude less sensitive than SQUID magnetometry. VSMs can be combined with SQUIDs to create a system that is more sensitive than either one alone. Heat due to the sample vibration can limit the base temperature of a VSM, typically to 2 Kelvin. VSM is also impractical for measuring a fragile sample that is sensitive to rapid acceleration.
Pulsed Field Extraction Magnetometry.
Pulsed Field Extraction Magnetometry is another method making use of pickup coils to measure magnetization. Unlike VSMs where the sample is physically vibrated, in Pulsed Field Extraction Magnetometry, the sample is secured and the external magnetic field is changed rapidly, for example in a capacitor-driven magnet. One of multiple techniques must then be used to cancel out the external field from the field produced by the sample. These include counterwound coils that cancel the external uniform field, and background measurements with the sample removed from the coil.
Torque Magnetometry.
Magnetic torque magnetometry can be even more sensitive than SQUID magnetometry. However, magnetic torque magnetometry doesn’t measure magnetism directly as all the previously mentioned methods do. Magnetic torque magnetometry instead measures the torque τ acting on a sample’s magnetic moment μ as a result of a uniform magnetic field B, τ=μ×B.
A torque is thus a measure of the sample's magnetic or shape anisotropy. In some cases the sample's magnetization can be extracted from the measured torque. In other cases, the magnetic torque measurement is used to detect magnetic phase transitions or quantum oscillations. The most common way to measure magnetic torque is to mount the sample on a cantilever and measure the displacement via capacitance measurement between the cantilever and nearby fixed object, or by measuring the piezoelectricity of the cantilever, or by optical interferometry off the surface of the cantilever.
Faraday Force Magnetometry.
Faraday Force Magnetometry makes use of the fact that a spatial magnetic field gradient will produce force acting on a magnetized object, F=(M⋅∇)B. In Faraday Force Magnetometry the force on the sample can be measured by a scale (hanging the sample from a sensitive balance), or by detecting the displacement against a spring. Commonly a capacitive load cell or cantilever is used because of its sensitivity, size, and lack of mechanical parts. Faraday Force Magnetometry is approximately one order of magnitude less sensitive than a SQUID. The biggest drawback to Faraday Force Magnetometry is that it requires some means of not only producing a magnetic field, but also producing a magnetic field gradient. While this can be accomplished by using a set of special pole faces, a much better result can be achieved by using set of gradient coils. A major advantage to Faraday Force Magnetometry is that it is small and reasonably tolerant to noise, and thus can be implemented in a wide range of environments, including a dilution refrigerator. Faraday Force Magnetometry can also be complicated by the presence of torque (see previous technique). This can be circumvented by varying the gradient field independently of the applied DC field so the torque and the Faraday Force contribution can be separated, and/or by designing a Faraday Force Magnetometer that prevents the sample from being rotated.
Optical Magnetometry.
Optical magnetometry makes use of various optical techniques to measure magnetization. One such technique, Kerr Magnetometry makes use of the magneto-optic Kerr effect, or MOKE. In this technique, incident light is directed at the sample’s surface. Light interacts with a magnetized surface nonlinearly so the reflected light has an elliptical polarization which is then measured by a detector. Another method of optical magnetometry is Faraday Rotation Magnetometry. Faraday Rotation Magnetometry utilizes nonlinear magneto-optical rotation to measure a sample’s magnetization. In this method a Faraday Modulating thin film is applied to the sample to be measured and a series of images are taken with a camera that senses the polarization of the reflected light. In order to reduce noise, multiple pictures are then averaged together. One advantage to this method is that it allows mapping of the magnetic characteristics over the surface of a sample. This can be especially useful when studying such things as the Meissner Effect on superconductors.
Survey magnetometers.
Survey magnetometers can be divided into two basic types:
A vector is a mathematical entity with both magnitude and direction. The Earth's magnetic field at a given point is a vector. A magnetic compass is designed to give a horizontal bearing direction, whereas a "vector magnetometer" measures both the magnitude and direction of the total magnetic field. Three orthogonal sensors are required to measure the components of the magnetic field in all three dimensions.
They are also rated as "absolute" if the strength of the field can be calibrated from their own known internal constants or "relative" if they need to be calibrated by reference to a known field.
A "magnetograph" is a magnetometer that continuously records data.
Magnetometers can also be classified as "AC" if they measure fields that vary relatively rapidly in time (>100 Hz), and "DC" if they measure fields that vary only slowly (quasi-static) or are static. AC magnetometers find use in electromagnetic systems (such as magnetotellurics), and DC magnetometers are used for detecting mineralisation and corresponding geological structures.
Scalar magnetometers.
Proton precession magnetometer.
"Proton precession magnetometer"s, also known as "proton magnetometers", PPMs or simply mags, measure the resonance frequency of protons (hydrogen nuclei) in the magnetic field to be measured, due to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Because the precession frequency depends only on atomic constants and the strength of the ambient magnetic field, the accuracy of this type of magnetometer can reach 1 ppm.
A direct current flowing in a solenoid creates a strong magnetic field around a hydrogen-rich fluid (kerosene and decane are popular, and even water can be used), causing some of the protons to align themselves with that field. The current is then interrupted, and as protons realign themselves with the ambient magnetic field, they precess at a frequency that is directly proportional to the magnetic field. This produces a weak rotating magnetic field that is picked up by a (sometimes separate) inductor, amplified electronically, and fed to a digital frequency counter whose output is typically scaled and displayed directly as field strength or output as digital data.
For hand/backpack carried units, PPM sample rates are typically limited to less than one sample per second. Measurements are typically taken with the sensor held at fixed locations at approximately 10 metre increments.
Portable instruments are also limited by sensor volume (weight) and power consumption. PPMs work in field gradients up to 3,000 nT/m which is adequate from most mineral exploration work. For higher gradient tolerance, such as mapping banded iron formations and detecting large ferrous objects, Overhauser magnetometers can handle 10,000 nT/m, and caesium magnetometers can handle 30,000 nT/m.
They are relatively inexpensive (< 8,000 USD) and were once widely used in mineral exploration. Three manufacturers dominate the market: GEM Systems, Geometrics and Scintrex. Popular models include G-856, Smartmag and GSM-18 and GSM-19T.
For mineral exploration, they have been superseded by Overhauser, Caesium and Potassium instruments, all of which are fast-cycling, and do not require the operator to pause between readings.
Overhauser effect magnetometer.
The "Overhauser effect magnetometer" or "Overhauser magnetometer" uses the same fundamental effect as the "proton precession magnetometer" to take measurements. By adding free radicals to the measurement fluid, the nuclear Overhauser effect can be exploited to significantly improve upon the proton precession magnetometer. Rather than aligning the protons using a solenoid, a low power radio-frequency field is used to align (polarise) the electron spin of the free radicals, which then couples to the protons via the Overhauser effect. This has two main advantages: driving the RF field takes a fraction of the energy (allowing lighter-weight batteries for portable units), and faster sampling as the electron-proton coupling can happen even as measurements are being taken. An Overhauser magnetometer produces readings with a 0.01 nT to 0.02 nT standard deviation while sampling once per second.
Caesium vapour magnetometer.
The "optically pumped caesium vapour magnetometer" is a highly sensitive (300 fT/Hz0.5) and accurate device used in a wide range of applications. It is one of a number of alkali vapours (including rubidium and potassium) that are used in this way, as well as helium.
The device broadly consists of a photon emitter containing a caesium light emitter or lamp, an absorption chamber containing caesium vapour, a "buffer gas" through which the emitted photons pass and a photon detector, arranged in that order.
The basic principle that allows the device to operate is the fact that a caesium atom can exist in any of nine energy levels, which can be informally thought of as the placement of electron atomic orbitals around the atomic nucleus. When a caesium atom within the chamber encounters a photon from the lamp, it is excited to a higher energy state, emits a photon and falls to an indeterminate lower energy state. The caesium atom is "sensitive" to the photons from the lamp in three of its nine energy states, and therefore, assuming a closed system, all the atoms will eventually fall into a state in which all the photons from the lamp will pass through unhindered and be measured by the photon detector. At this point, the sample (or population) is said to be polarized and ready for measurement to take place. This process is done continuously during operation. This theoretically perfect magnetometer is now functional and so can begin to make measurements.
In the most common type of caesium magnetometer, a very small AC magnetic field is applied to the cell. Since the difference in the energy levels of the electrons is determined by the external magnetic field, there is a frequency at which this small AC field will cause the electrons to change states. In this new state, the electron will once again be able to absorb a photon of light. This causes a signal on a photo detector that measures the light passing through the cell. The associated electronics use this fact to create a signal exactly at the frequency which corresponds to the external field.
Another type of caesium magnetometer modulates the light applied to the cell. This is referred to as a Bell-Bloom magnetometer, after the two scientists who first investigated the effect. If the light is turned on and off at the frequency corresponding to the Earth's field, there is a change in the signal seen at the photo detector. Again, the associated electronics use this to create a signal exactly at the frequency which corresponds to the external field. Both methods lead to high performance magnetometers.
Potassium vapour magnetometer.
Potassium is the only optically pumped magnetometer that operates on a single, narrow electron spin resonance (ESR) line is contrast to other alkali vapour magnetometers that use an irregular, composite and wide spectral lines and Helium with the inherently wide spectral line.
Applications.
The caesium and potassium magnetometers are typically used where a higher performance magnetometer than the proton magnetometer is needed. In archaeology and geophysics, where the sensor sweeps through an area and many accurate magnetic field measurements are often needed, caesium and potassium magnetometers have advantages over the proton magnetometer.
The caesium and potassium magnetometer's faster measurement rate allows the sensor to be moved through the area more quickly for a given number of data points. Caesium and potassium magnetometers are insensitive to rotation of the sensor while the measurement is being made.
The lower noise of caesium and potassium magnetometers allow those measurements to more accurately show the variations in the field with position.
Vector magnetometers.
Vector magnetometers measure one or more components of the magnetic field electronically. Using three orthogonal magnetometers, both azimuth and dip (inclination) can be measured. By taking the square root of the sum of the squares of the components the total magnetic field strength (also called total magnetic intensity, TMI) can be calculated by Pythagoras's theorem.
Vector magnetometers are subject to temperature drift and the dimensional instability of the ferrite cores. They also require levelling to obtain component information, unlike total field (scalar) instruments. For these reasons they are no longer used for mineral exploration.
Rotating coil magnetometer.
The magnetic field induces a sine wave in a rotating coil. The amplitude of the signal is proportional to the strength of the field, provided it is uniform, and to the sine of the angle between the rotation axis of the coil and the field lines. This type of magnetometer is obsolete.
Hall effect magnetometer.
The most common magnetic sensing devices are solid-state Hall effect sensors. These sensors produce a voltage proportional to the applied magnetic field and also sense polarity. They are used in applications where the magnetic field strength is relatively large, such as in anti-lock braking systems in cars which sense wheel rotation speed via slots in the wheel disks.
Magnetoresistive devices.
These are made of thin strips of permalloy (NiFe magnetic film) whose electrical resistance varies with a change in magnetic field. They have a well-defined axis of sensitivity, can be produced in 3-D versions and can be mass-produced as an integrated circuit. They have a response time of less than 1 microsecond and can be sampled in moving vehicles up to 1,000 times/second. They can be used in compasses that read within 1°, for which the underlying sensor must reliably resolve 0.1°.
Fluxgate magnetometer.
The fluxgate magnetometer was invented by H. Aschenbrenner and G. Goubau in 1936. A team at Gulf Research Laboratories led by Victor Vacquier developed airborne fluxgate magnetometers to detect submarines during World War II, and after the war confirmed the theory of plate tectonics by using them to measure shifts in the magnetic patterns on the sea floor.
A fluxgate magnetometer consists of a small, magnetically susceptible core wrapped by two coils of wire. An alternating electric current is passed through one coil, driving the core through an alternating cycle of magnetic saturation; i.e., magnetised, unmagnetised, inversely magnetised, unmagnetised, magnetised, and so forth. This constantly changing field induces an electric current in the second coil, and this output current is measured by a detector. In a magnetically neutral background, the input and output currents will match. However, when the core is exposed to a background field, it will be more easily saturated in alignment with that field and less easily saturated in opposition to it. Hence the alternating magnetic field, and the induced output current, will be out of step with the input current. The extent to which this is the case will depend on the strength of the background magnetic field. Often, the current in the output coil is integrated, yielding an output analog voltage, proportional to the magnetic field.
A wide variety of sensors are currently available and used to measure magnetic fields. Fluxgate compasses and gradiometers measure the direction and magnitude of magnetic fields. Fluxgates are affordable, rugged and compact with miniaturization recently advancing to the point of complete sensor solutions in the form of IC chips, including examples from both academia and industry. This, plus their typically low power consumption makes them ideal for a variety of sensing applications. Gradiometers are commonly used for archaeological prospecting and unexploded ordnance (UXO) detection such as the German military's popular "Foerster".
The typical fluxgate magnetometer consists of a "sense" (secondary) coil surrounding an inner "drive" (primary) coil that is closely wound around a highly permeable core material, such as mu-metal. An alternating current is applied to the drive winding, which drives the core in a continuous repeating cycle of saturation and unsaturation. To an external field, the core is alternately weakly permeable and highly permeable. The core is often a toroidally-wrapped ring or a pair of linear elements whose drive windings are each wound in opposing directions. Such closed flux paths minimise coupling between the drive and sense windings. In the presence of an external magnetic field, with the core in a highly permeable state, such a field will be locally attracted or gated (hence the name fluxgate) through the sense winding. When the core is weakly permeable, the external field will not be so attracted. This continuous gating of the external field in and out of the sense winding induces a signal in the sense winding, whose principal frequency is twice that of the drive frequency, and whose strength and phase orientation vary directly with the external field magnitude and polarity.
There are additional factors that affect the size of the resultant signal. These factors include the number of turns in the sense winding, magnetic permeability of the core, sensor geometry, and the gated flux rate of change with respect to time.
Phase synchronous detection is used to extract these harmonic signals from the sense winding and convert them into a DC voltage proportional to the external magnetic field. Active current feedback may also be employed, such that the sense winding is driven to counteract the external field. In such cases, the feedback current varies linearly with the external magnetic field and is used as the basis for measurement. This helps to counter inherent non-linearity between the applied external field strength and the flux gated through the sense winding.
SQUID magnetometer.
SQUIDs, or superconducting quantum interference devices, measure extremely small changes in magnetic fields. They are very sensitive vector magnetometers, with noise levels as low as 3 fT Hz−½ in commercial instruments and 0.4 fT Hz−½ in experimental devices. Many liquid-helium-cooled commercial SQUIDs achieve a flat noise spectrum from near DC (less than 1 Hz) to tens of kilohertz, making such devices ideal for time-domain biomagnetic signal measurements. SERF atomic magnetometers demonstrated in laboratories so far reach competitive noise floor but in relatively small frequency ranges.
SQUID magnetometers require cooling with liquid helium () or liquid nitrogen () to operate, hence the packaging requirements to use them are rather stringent both from a thermal-mechanical as well as magnetic standpoint. SQUID magnetometers are most commonly used to measure the magnetic fields produced by laboratory samples, also for brain or heart activity (magnetoencephalography and magnetocardiography, respectively). Geophysical surveys use SQUIDs from time to time, but the logistics of cooling the SQUID are much more complicated than other magnetometers that operate at room temperature.
Spin-exchange relaxation-free (SERF) atomic magnetometers.
At sufficiently high atomic density, extremely high sensitivity can be achieved. Spin-exchange-relaxation-free (SERF) atomic magnetometers containing potassium, caesium or rubidium vapor operate similarly to the caesium magnetometers described above, yet can reach sensitivities lower than 1 fT Hz-½. The SERF magnetometers only operate in small magnetic fields. The Earth's field is about 50 µT; SERF magnetometers operate in fields less than 0.5 µT.
Large volume detectors have achieved a sensitivity of 200 aT Hz-½. This technology has greater sensitivity per unit volume than SQUID detectors. The technology can also produce very small magnetometers that may in the future replace coils for detecting changing magnetic fields. This technology may produce a magnetic sensor that has all of its input and output signals in the form of light on fiber-optic cables. This would allow the magnetic measurement to be made in places where high electrical voltages exist.
Uses.
Magnetometers have a very diverse range of applications, including locating objects such as submarines, sunken ships, hazards for tunnel boring machines, hazards in coal mines, unexploded ordnance, toxic waste drums, as well as a wide range of mineral deposits and geological structures. They also have applications in heart beat monitors, weapon systems positioning, sensors in anti-locking brakes, weather prediction (via solar cycles), steel pylons, drill guidance systems, archaeology, plate tectonics and radio wave propagation and planetary exploration.
Depending on the application, magnetometers can be deployed in spacecraft, aeroplanes ("fixed wing" magnetometers), helicopters ("stinger" and "bird"), on the ground ("backpack"), towed at a distance behind quad bikes ("sled" or "trailer"), lowered into boreholes ("tool", "probe" or "sonde") and towed behind boats ("tow fish").
Archaeology.
Magnetometers are also used to detect archaeological sites, shipwrecks and other buried or submerged objects. Fluxgate gradiometers are popular due to their compact configuration and relatively low cost. Gradiometers enhance shallow features and negate the need for a base station. Caesium and Overhauser magnetometers are also very effective when used as gradiometers or as single-sensor systems with base stations.
The TV program "Time Team" popularised 'geophys', including magnetic techniques used in archaeological work to detect fire hearths, walls of baked bricks and magnetic stones such as basalt and granite. Walking tracks and roadways can sometimes be mapped with differential compaction in magnetic soils or with disturbances in clays, such as on the Great Hungarian Plain. Ploughed fields behave as sources of magnetic noise in such surveys.
Auroras.
Magnetometers can give an indication of auroral activity before the light from the aurora becomes visible. A grid of magnetometers around the world constantly measures the effect of the solar wind on the Earth's magnetic field, which is then published on the K-index.
Coal exploration.
Whilst magnetometers can be used to help map basin shape at a regional scale, they are more commonly used to map hazards to coal mining, such as basaltic intrusions (dykes, sills and volcanic plugs) that destroy resources and are dangerous to longwall mining equipment. Magnetometers can also locate zones ignited by lightning and map siderite (an impurity in coal).
The best survey results are achieved on the ground in high-resolution surveys (with approximately 10 m line spacing and 0.5 m station spacing). Bore-hole magnetometers using a Ferret can also assist when coal seams are deep, by using multiple sills or looking beneath surface basalt flows.
Modern surveys generally use magnetometers with GPS technology to automatically record the magnetic field and their location. The data set is then corrected with data from a second magnetometer (the base station) that is left stationary and records the change in the Earth's magnetic field during the survey.
Directional drilling.
Magnetometers are used in directional drilling for oil or gas to detect the azimuth of the drilling tools near the drill. They are most often paired with accelerometers in drilling tools so that both the inclination and azimuth of the drill can be found.
Military.
For defensive purposes, navies use arrays of magnetometers laid across sea floors in strategic locations (i.e. around ports) to monitor submarine activity. The Russian 'Goldfish' (titanium submarines) were designed and built at great expense to thwart such systems (as pure titanium is non-magnetic).
Military submarines are degaussed by passing through large underwater loops at regular intervals in a bid in order to escape detection by sea-floor monitoring systems, magnetic anomaly detectors and mines that are triggered by magnetic anomalies. However, submarines are never completely de-magnetised. It is possible to tell the depth at which a submarine has been by measuring its magnetic field, which is distorted as the pressure distorts the hull and hence the field. Heating can also change the magnetization of steel.
Submarines tow long sonar arrays to detect ships, and can even recognise different propeller noises. The sonar arrays need to be accurately positioned so they can triangulate direction to targets (e.g. ships). The arrays do not tow in a straight line, so fluxgate magnetometers are used to orient each sonar node in the array.
Fluxgates can also be used in weapons navigation systems, but have been largely superseded by GPS and ring laser gyroscopes.
Magnetometers such as the German Foerster are used to locate ferrous ordnance. Caesium and Overhauser magnetometers are used to locate and help clean up old bombing/test ranges.
UAV payloads also include magnetometers for a range of defensive and offensive tasks.
Mineral exploration.
Magnetometric surveys can be useful in defining magnetic anomalies which represent ore (direct detection), or in some cases gangue minerals associated with ore deposits (indirect or inferential detection). This includes iron ore, magnetite, hematite and often pyrrhotite.
Developed countries such as Australia, Canada and USA invest heavily in systematic airborne magnetic surveys of their respective continents and surrounding oceans, to assist with map geology and in the discovery of mineral deposits. Such aeromag surveys are typically undertaken with 400 m line spacing at 100 m elevation, with readings every 10 meters or more. To overcome the asymmetry in the data density, data is interpolated between lines (usually 5 times) and data along the line is then averaged. Such data would be gridded to an 80 m × 80 m pixel size and image processed using a program like ERMapper. At an exploration lease scale, the survey may be followed by a more detailed helimag or crop duster style fixed wing at 50 m line spacing and 50 m elevation (terrain permitting). Such an image would be gridded on a 10 x 10 m pixel, offering 64 times the resolution.
Where targets are shallow (<200 m), aeromag anomalies may be followed up with ground magnetic surveys on 10 m to 50 m line spacing with 1 m station spacing in order to give the best detail (2 to 10 m pixel grid) (or 25 times the resolution prior to drilling).
Magnetic fields from magnetic bodies of ore fall off with the inverse distance cubed (dipole target), or at best inverse distance squared (magnetic monopole target). One analogy to the resolution-with-distance is a car driving at night with lights on. At a distance of 400 m one sees one glowing haze, but as it approaches, two headlights, and then the left blinker, are visible.
There are many challenges interpreting magnetic data for mineral exploration. Multiple targets mix together like multiple heat sources and, unlike light, there is no magnetic telescope to focus fields. The combination of multiple sources is measured at the surface. The geometry, depth or magnetisation direction (remanence) of the targets are also generally not known, and so multiple models can explain the data.
Potent by Geophysical Software Solutions [http://www.geoss.com.au/] is a leading magnetic (and gravity) interpretation package used extensively in the Australian exploration industry.
Magnetometers assist mineral explorers both directly (i.e., gold mineralisation associated with magnetite, diamonds in kimberlite pipes) and, more commonly, indirectly, such as by mapping geological structures conducive to mineralisation (i.e., shear zones and alteration haloes around granites).
Airborne Magnetometers detect the change in the Earth's magnetic field using sensors attached to the aircraft in the form of a "stinger" or by towing a magnetometer on the end of a cable. The magnetometer on a cable is often referred to as a "bomb" because of its shape. Others call it a "bird".
Because hills and valleys under the aircraft will cause the magnetic readings to rise and fall, a radar altimeter is used to keep track of the transducer's deviation from the nominal altitude above ground. There may also be a camera that takes photos of the ground. The location of the measurement is determined by also recording a GPS.
Mobile telephones.
Many smartphones contain magnetometers; apps exist that serve as compasses. The iPhone 3GS has a magnetometer, a magnetoresistive permalloy sensor, the AN-203 produced by Honeywell. In 2009, the price of three-axis magnetometers dipped below US $1 per device and dropped rapidly. The use of a three-axis device means that it is not sensitive to the way it is held in orientation or elevation. Hall effect devices are also popular.
Researchers at Deutsche Telekom have used magnetometers embedded in mobile devices to permit touchless 3D interaction. Their interaction framework, called MagiTact, tracks changes to the magnetic field around a cellphone to identify different gestures made by a hand holding or wearing a magnet.
Oil exploration.
Seismic methods are preferred to magnetometers as the primary survey method for oil exploration although magnetic methods can give additional information about the underlying geology and in some environments evidence of leakage from traps. Magnetometers are also used in oil exploration to show locations of geologic features that would make drilling impractical, and other features that give geophysicists a more complete picture of stratigraphy.
Spacecraft.
A three-axis fluxgate magnetometer was part of the Mariner 2 and Mariner 10 missions. A dual technique magnetometer is part of the Cassini–Huygens mission to explore Saturn. This system is composed of a vector helium and fluxgate magnetometers. Magnetometers were also a component instrument on the Mercury MESSENGER mission. A magnetometer can also be used by satellites like GOES to measure both the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field of a planet or moon.
Magnetic surveys.
Systematic surveys can be used to in searching for mineral deposits or locating lost objects. Such surveys are divided into:
Aeromag datasets for Australia can be downloaded from the GADDS database.
Data can be divided in point located and image data, the latter of which is in ERMapper format.
Magnetovision.
On the base of space measured distribution of magnetic field parameters (e.g. amplitude or direction), the magnetovision images may be generated. Such presentation of magnetic data is very useful for further analyse and data fusion.
Gradiometer.
Magnetic gradiometers are pairs of magnetometers with their sensors separated, usually horizontally,by a fixed distance. The readings are subtracted in order to measure the difference between the sensed magnetic fields, which gives the field gradients caused by magnetic anomalies. This is one way of compensating both for the variability in time of the Earth's magnetic field and for other sources of electromagnetic interference, thus allowing for more sensitive detection of anomalies. Because nearly equal values are being subtracted, the noise performance requirements for the magnetometers is more extreme.
Gradiometers enhance shallow magnetic anomalies and are thus good for archaeological and site investigation work. They are also good for real-time work such as unexploded ordnance location. It is twice as efficient to run a base station and use two (or more) mobile sensors to read parallel lines simultaneously (assuming data is stored and post-processed). In this manner, both along-line and cross-line gradients can be calculated.
Position control of magnetic surveys.
In traditional mineral exploration and archaeological work, grid pegs placed by theodolite and tape measure were used to define the survey area. Some UXO surveys used ropes to define the lanes. Airborne surveys used radio triangulation beacons, such as Siledus.
Non-magnetic electronic hipchain triggers were developed to trigger magnetometers. They used rotary shaft encoders to measure distance along disposable cotton reels.
Modern explorers use a range of low-magnetic signature GPS units, including Real-Time Kinematic GPS.
Heading errors in magnetic surveys.
Magnetic surveys can suffer from noise coming from a range of sources. Different magnetometer technologies suffer different kinds of noise problems.
Heading errors are one group of noise. They can come from three sources:
Some total field sensors give different readings depending on their orientation. Magnetic materials in the sensor itself are the primary cause of this error. In some magnetometers, such as the vapor magnetometers (caesium, potassium, etc.), there are sources of heading error in the physics that contribute small amounts to the total heading error.
Console noise comes from magnetic components on or within the console. These include ferrite in cores in inductors and transformers, steel frames around LCD's, legs on IC chips and steel cases in disposable batteries. Some popular MIL spec connectors also have steel springs.
Operators must take care to be magnetically clean and should check the 'magnetic hygiene' of all apparel and items carries during a survey. Akubra hats are very popular in Australia, but their steel rims must be removed before use on magnetic surveys. Steel rings on notepads, steel capped boots and steel springs in overall eyelets can all cause unnecessary noise in surveys. Pens, mobile phones and stainless steel implants can also be problematic.
The magnetic response (noise) from ferrous object on the operator and console can change with heading direction because of induction and remanence. Aeromagnetic survey aircraft and quad bike systems can use special compensators to correct for heading error noise.
Heading errors look like herringbone patterns in survey images. Alternate lines can also be corrugated.
Image processing of magnetic data.
Recording data and image processing is superior to real-time work because subtle anomalies often missed by the operator (especially in magnetically noisy areas) can be correlated between lines, shapes and clusters better defined. A range of sophisticated enhancement techniques can also be used. There is also a hard copy and need for systematic coverage.

</doc>
<doc id="83063" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83063" title="Erythraean Sibyl">
Erythraean Sibyl

The Erythraean Sibyl was the prophetess of classical antiquity presiding over the Apollonian oracle at Erythrae, a town in Ionia opposite Chios, which was built by Neleus, the son of Codrus. 
The word Sibyl comes (via Latin) from the ancient Greek word "sibylla", meaning prophetess. Sibyls would give answers whose value depended upon good questions - unlike prophets who typically answered with responses indirectly related to questions asked. There were many sibyls in the ancient world, but this oracle prophesied Alexander the Great's divine parentage, according to legend. 
Presumably there was more than one sibyl at Erythrae. One is recorded as having been named Herophile. At least one is said to have been from Chaldea, a nation in the southern portion of Babylonia, being the daughter of Berossus who wrote the Chaldean history, and Erymanthe. Apollodorus of Erythrae, however, says that one who was his own countrywoman predicted the Trojan War and prophesied to the Greeks both that Troy would be destroyed and that Homer would write falsehoods.
In Christian iconography the Erythraean Sibyl sometimes appears as one who prophesied the Redemption. Examples were in mediaeval paintings in Salisbury cathedral, and others are shown in the illustrations on this page. 
The word was first applied to the prophecies of the Erythraean Sibyl, which were written on leaves and arranged so that the initial letters of the leaves always formed a word.
All-nourishing Creator, who in allSweet breath implanted, and made God the guide of all.

</doc>
<doc id="83065" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83065" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score">
Academy Award for Best Original Score

The Academy Award for Best Original Score is presented to the best substantial body of music in the form of dramatic underscoring written specifically for the film by the submitting composer.
Superlatives.
These are only for nominations in the Scoring categories. Nominations in other categories, such as the Original Song category, are not included.
Only one composer has won two Scoring Oscars the same year: in 1973, Marvin Hamlisch won Original Dramatic Score for "The Way We Were" and Best Adaptation Score, for "The Sting". Hamlisch also won Best Song that year for "The Way We Were (song)", making him the only composer to win three music Oscars in the same year.
Only one composer has won Oscars three years in a row: Roger Edens won for "Easter Parade" (1948), "On the Town" (1949) and "Annie Get Your Gun" (1950).
Eight composers have won Oscars two years in a row:
Female nominees.
Three women have won in the scoring categories. Two are composers: Rachel Portman, who won for "Emma" (1996), and Anne Dudley, who won for "The Full Monty" (1997); the third, is lyricist Marilyn Bergman, who won for "Yentl" (1983) in the Original Song Score category, sharing the award with co-lyricist Alan Bergman (her husband) and composer Michel Legrand.
The only female composers nominated for multiple Scoring Oscars are Rachel Portman, who was nominated for "Emma" (1996) (for which she won for Best Original Score), "The Cider House Rules" (1999) and "Chocolat" (2000); and Angela Morley, who was nominated twice in the Original Song Score category for "The Little Prince" (1974) and "The Slipper and the Rose" (1976).
Notable nominees.
Dmitri Shostakovich and Duke Ellington were both nominated the same year but lost to arrangers of "West Side Story".
Because much of the music in film is usually classical music, the scores of "Midnight Express" by Giorgio Moroder in 1979, "Slumdog Millionaire" by A. R. Rahman in 2009, "The Social Network" in 2011 by Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross and "Her" by William Butler and Owen Pallett in 2014 are the only scores with electronic based music ever to be nominated, with the first three winning the award.
Noted nominated composers known for their music mostly outside of the film world include: Aaron Copland, Kurt Weill, Gian-Carlo Menotti, Philip Glass, John Corigliano, Peter Maxwell Davies, Randy Newman, Stephen Schwartz, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Artie Shaw, Trent Reznor, Quincy Jones and Herbie Hancock.
Rock musicians and pop stars are most often nominated in the songwriting category. A handful that were nominated in the Scoring categories includes: John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, Ringo Starr, Prince, Pete Townshend, Rod McKuen, Isaac Hayes, Kris Kristofferson, Quincy Jones, Randy Newman, Anthony Newley, Paul Williams, Tom Waits, David Byrne, Ryuichi Sakamoto, Trent Reznor and Matthew Wilder.
Record producers George Martin (the Beatles) and Jerry Wexler (Atlantic Records) also received nominations in the Scoring categories.
At the age of 87, Ennio Morricone became the oldest winner in Oscar history for a competitive award.
Multiple nominations.
The following is a list of composers nominated more than once and winning at least one Academy Award. The list is sorted by number of wins, with the number of total nominations listed in parentheses. These do not include nominations (or wins) in the Best Original Song category.
The following composers have been nominated for a Best Original Score Oscar more than once but have yet to garner one. The number of nominations is listed in parentheses. These do not include nominations (or wins) in the Best Original Song category.
Deceased:
Living:
Winners and nominees.
The following is the list of nominated composers organized by year, and listing both films and composers. The years shown in the following list of winners are the production years, thus a reference to 1967 means the Oscars presented in 1968 for films released in 1967.
Note: From 1934-1937, the head of the music department (rather than the actual composer or composers, in most cases) received the nominations or award.
Note: From 1937-1945, any studio was guaranteed a nomination just by submitting a qualified entry.
1980s.
Best Original Score
1990s.
Note: From 1995 to 1998, songwriters and lyricists along with orchestral underscore composers were also eligible for nominations in the "Musical or Comedy Score" category.

</doc>
<doc id="83066" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83066" title="Metope (disambiguation)">
Metope (disambiguation)

Metope may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83067" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83067" title="Syrus">
Syrus

In Greek mythology, Syrus was the son of Sinope (daughter of Asopus and Merope) and Apollo; the syrians are named after him.

</doc>
<doc id="83071" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83071" title="Eternalism (philosophy of time)">
Eternalism (philosophy of time)

Eternalism is a philosophical approach to the ontological nature of time, which takes the view that all points in time are equally "real", as opposed to the presentist idea that only the present is real and the growing block universe theory of time in which the past and present are real while the future is not. Eternalism is the view that each spacetime moment exists in and of itself. Modern advocates often take inspiration from the way time is modeled as a dimension in the theory of relativity, giving time a similar ontology to that of space (although the basic idea dates back at least to McTaggart's B-Theory of time, first published in "The Unreality of Time" in 1908, only three years after the first paper on relativity). This would mean that time is just another dimension, that future events are "already there", and that there is no objective flow of time. It is sometimes referred to as the "block time" or "block universe" theory due to its description of space-time as an unchanging four-dimensional "block", as opposed to the view of the world as a three-dimensional space modulated by the passage of time.
Problems with the flow of time.
Conventionally, time is divided into three distinct regions; the "past", the "present", and the "future". Using that representational model, the past is generally seen as being immutably fixed, and the future as undefined and nebulous. As time passes, the moment that was once the present becomes part of the past; and part of the future, in turn, becomes the new present. In this way time is said to pass, with a distinct present moment "moving" forward into the future and leaving the past behind.
Within this intuitive understanding of time is the philosophy of presentism, which argues that only the present exists. It does not travel forward through an environment of time, moving from a real point in the past and toward a real point in the future. Instead, the present simply changes. The past and future do not exist and are only concepts used to describe the real, isolated, and changing present.
This conventional model presents a number of difficult philosophical problems, and seems difficult to reconcile with currently accepted scientific theories such as the theory of relativity.
Simultaneity.
Special relativity suggests that the concept of simultaneity is not universal: according to the relativity of simultaneity, observers in different frames of reference can have different perceptions of whether a given pair of events happened at the same time or at different times, with there being no physical basis for preferring one frame's judgments over another's (though in a case where one event A happens in the past light cone of another event B, all frames will agree that A happened in the past of B). So, in special relativity there can be no "physical" basis for picking out a unique set of events that are all happening simultaneously in "the present".
Many philosophers have argued that relativity implies eternalism. Although he disagrees in a qualified sense, philosopher of science Dean Rickles notes that "the consensus among philosophers seems to be that special and general relativity are incompatible with presentism." For example, Christian Wüthrich writes:
However, there are some, such as Dean Zimmerman, who have argued that it is possible to accept the physical predictions of relativity while adopting an alternative interpretation of the theory ("For instance, see" Lorentz ether theory) in which there is a single privileged frame whose judgments about length, time and simultaneity are the "true" ones, even though there would be absolutely no empirical way to distinguish this frame from other frames, and no real experience could identify it.
Time as object or environment.
While the present is intuitively understood as the object that moves through the environment of time, it is common to also describe time as an object that moves, in the same way that a passenger on a train perceives the environment passing by. This perception of the passage or flow of time can be confused with the previous idea of the present moving through time, leading to the misunderstanding that time is moving through time, i.e., that it is moving through itself. This illogical premise can lead to circular questions asking how fast time travels per unit of time:
The concept of "time passing" can be considered to be internally inconsistent, by asking "how much time goes by in an hour?" The question "how fast does time pass" seems to have no satisfactory answer, in which answers such as "a second per second" would be, as some would argue, circular and thus false. In addition, even if we do accept the above answer, then the statement "a second per second" can be expressed as a fraction which is always equal to "one". But this "one" has no meaning beyond being a number and is thus also the wrong kind of answer. Therefore, the argument goes, the rate of the passage of time is nonsensical.
There is a major problem though in that the question of time is no different from space. One can similarly ask, "how much space is contained in a meter?" — and face a similar objection.
"Time passing" may be seen as a metaphor for the continuous human experience of some expected future events becoming directly experienced qualia, while experienced qualia becoming just objects of memory.
McTaggart's argument.
In "The Unreality of Time", J. M. E. McTaggart divided time into an "A-series" and a "B-series", with the A-series describing events in absolute tensed terms (past, present, and future) and the B-series describing events in terms of untensed temporal relations (before and after). He also added the notion of a "C-series", a series that has an order but with no notion of time, like a series of letters. He went on to argue that the A-series was needed for anything deserving the name "time", since he argued that only the A-series can allow for genuine change, and he considered change to be an essential part of any reasonable definition of time. But, he argued, the A-series was logically incoherent, so he concluded that time was unreal, and since he also believed the B-series depended on the A-series, he also concluded that only the C-series could remain as a meaningful ordering. However, various philosophers (sometimes identified as "B theorists") have held that the remaining B-series qualifies as a valid framework for a theory of time, sometimes called the B-Theory of time.
The Eternalist alternative.
Eternalism addresses these various difficulties by considering all points in time to be equally valid frames of reference—or equally "real", if one prefers. It does not do away with the concept of past and future, but instead considers them directions rather than states of being; whether some point in time is in the future or past is entirely dependent on which frame of reference you are using as a basis for observing it.
Since an observer at any given point in time can only remember events that are in the past relative to him, and not events that are in the future relative to him, the subjective illusion of the passage of time is maintained. The asymmetry of remembering past events but not future ones, as well as other irreversible events that progress in only one temporal direction (such as the increase in entropy) gives rise to the arrow of time. In the view suggested by Eternalism, there is no passage of time; the ticking of a clock measures durations between events much as the marks on a measuring tape measures distances between places.
Eternalism has implications for the concept of free will, in that it proposes that future events are as immutably fixed and impossible to change as past events (see determinism). 
Eternalism makes two assumptions, which are separable. One is that time is a full-fledged real dimension. The other is immutability. The latter is not a necessary consequence of the first. A universe in which changes are possible may be indistinguishable from the fully deterministic many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, in which there are multiple "growing block universes".
Philosophical objections.
Philosophers such as John Lucas argue that "The Block universe gives a deeply inadequate view of time. It fails to account for the passage of time, the pre-eminence of the present, the directedness of time and the difference between the future and the past"
The comment summarizes the main objections. In more detail, they are:
Subjective sense of flow.
Whilst the idea that there is some objective sense in which time is flowing can be denied, the fact that conscious beings feel as though it is in some sense flowing cannot. However, if the flow of time didn't have an objective existence, then it is argued conscious beings would simultaneously experience all moments in their lives. A response is that since the brain presumably perceives time through information processing of external stimuli, not by extrasensory perception, and obeys the laws of causality, it is hard to see how the flow of time, whether it exists or not, could make any subjective difference: all conscious beings are built to perceive time as a chain of events, whether or not it occurs as such.
Apparent differences between past, present and future.
Many of our common-sense attitudes treat the past, present and future preferentially.
Status of conscious observers.
Eternalists often appeal to the idea that the flow of time is a subjective illusion. However, Eternalism takes its inspiration from physics and needs to give a physical account of observers. One could, for instance, portray conscious observers as moving through the block universe, in some physically inexplicable way, in order to account for the subjective sense of a flow of time. But there is no need to do so to explain the subjective flow of time. Their opponents claim that the time-flow itself, as an objective phenomenon, is physically inexplicable, and that physics is simply misrepresenting time in treating it as a dimension.
Determinism and indeterminism.
Previously, it was noted that people tend to have very different attitudes towards the past and the future. This might be explained by an underlying attitude that the future is not fixed, but can be changed, and is therefore worth worrying about. If that is correct, the flow of time is perhaps less important to our intuitions than an open, undetermined, future. In other words, a flow-of-time theory with a strictly determined future (which nonetheless does not exist at the present) would not satisfy common-sense intuitions about time. If indeterminism can be removed from flow-of-time theories, can it be added to Eternalist theories? Regarding John G. Cramer’s transactional interpretation, Kastner (2010) "proposed that in order to preserve the elegance and economy of the interpretation, it may be necessary to consider oﬀer and conﬁrmation waves as propagating in a “higher space” of possibilities.
In his discussion with Albert Einstein, Karl Popper argued against determinism:
Relation to physics.
Eternalism takes its inspiration from physics, especially the Rietdijk-Putnam argument, in which the relativity of simultaneity is used to show that each point in the universe can have a different set of events that are in its present moment. According to Presentism this is impossible because there is only one present moment that is instantaneous and encompasses the entire universe.
Some philosophers also appeal to a specific theory which is "timeless" in a more radical sense than the rest of physics, the theory of quantum gravity. This theory is used, for instance, in Julian Barbour's theory of timelessness. On the other hand, George Ellis argues that time is absent in cosmological theories because of the details they leave out.
Recently Hrvoje Nikolić has argued that a block time model solves the black hole information paradox.
Relation to pre-McTaggart positions.
Augustine of Hippo wrote that God is outside of time—that time exists only within the created universe. Thomas Aquinas took the same view, and many theologians agree. On this view, God would perceive something like a block universe, while time might appear differently to the finite beings contained within it.
The philosopher Katherin A. Rogers argued that Anselm of Canterbury took an eternalist view of time, although the philosopher Brian Leftow argued against this interpretation, suggesting that Anselm instead advocated for a type of presentism. Rogers responded to this paper, defending her original interpretation. Rogers also discusses this issue in her book "Anselm on Freedom", using the term "four-dimensionalism" rather than "eternalism" for the view that "the present moment is not ontologically privileged", and commenting that "Boethius and Augustine do sometimes sound rather four-dimensionalist, but Anselm is apparently the first consistently and explicitly to embrace the position." Taneli Kukkonen argues in the "Oxford Handbook of Medieval Philosophy" that "what Augustine's and Anselm's mix of eternalist and presentist, tenseless and tensed language tells is that medieval philosophers saw no need to choose sides" in the manner that modern philosophers do.
In Buddhism, a special term Dharmadhatu is translated as 'total field of events and meanings' or 'field of all events and meanings.' Here the 'Block Universe' seems to be encompassing not only every possible event in the physical universe but also having a psychological component.
Dirck Vorenkamp, a professor of religious studies, argued in his paper "B-Series Temporal Order in Dogen's Theory of Time" that the Zen Buddhist teacher Dōgen presented views on time that contained all the main elements of McTaggart's B-series view of time (which denies any objective present), although he noted that some of Dōgen reasoning also contained A-Series notions, which Vorenkamp argued may indicate some inconsistency in Dōgen's thinking.
In fiction.
Eternalism is a major theme in Kurt Vonnegut’s novel, "Slaughterhouse-Five". The Tralfamadorians, an alien species in the novel, have a four-dimensional sight and can therefore see all points in time simultaneously. They explain that since all moments exist simultaneously, everyone is always alive. The hero, Billy Pilgrim, lives his life out of sequence, which, among other things, means that his point of death occurs at a random point in his life rather than at the end of it.
Eternalism also appears in the comic book series "Watchmen" by Alan Moore. In one chapter, Dr. Manhattan explains how he perceives time. Since past, present, and future events all occur at the "same time" for him, he speaks about them all in the present tense. For example, he says "Forty years ago, cogs rain on Brooklyn" referring to an event in his youth when his father throws old watch parts out a window. His last line of the series is "Nothing ends, Adrian. Nothing ever ends."
In his science fantasy novel "The Number of the Beast", Robert Heinlein has one of the novel's protagonists, the mathematician and "geometer" Dr. Jacob Burroughs invent a device which can navigate through time as one scalar dimension in a six-dimensional universe. The novel carries its main characters through time as well as many alternate universes, some of which are fictional worlds, accessible by quantum-wise progression through one of the six axes of the universe Burroughs' invention can access. In this novel, there is not only block time, but a block plenum of many alternate universes, each a quantum step along an axis of space-time.

</doc>
<doc id="83076" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83076" title="Sphinx">
Sphinx

The sphinx ( , Boeotian: , "ʾabū l-hawl" "father of dread") is a mythical creature with, at a minimum, the head of a human and the body of a lion.
In Greek tradition, it has the head of a human, the haunches of a lion, and sometimes the wings of a bird. It is mythicised as treacherous and merciless. Those who cannot answer its riddle suffer a fate typical in such mythological stories, as they are killed and eaten by this ravenous monster. This deadly version of a sphinx appears in the myth and drama of Oedipus. Unlike the Greek sphinx, which was a woman, the Egyptian sphinx is typically shown as a man (an androsphinx). In addition, the Egyptian sphinx was viewed as benevolent, but having a ferocious strength similar to the malevolent Greek version and both were thought of as guardians often flanking the entrances to temples.
In European decorative art, the sphinx enjoyed a major revival during the Renaissance. Later, the sphinx image, something very similar to the original Ancient Egyptian concept, was exported into many other cultures, albeit often interpreted quite differently due to translations of descriptions of the originals and the evolution of the concept in relation to other cultural traditions.
Sphinxes are generally associated with architectural structures such as royal tombs or religious temples. The oldest known sphinx was found near Gobekli Tepe at another site, Nevali Çori, or possibly 120 miles to the east at Kortik Tepe, Turkey, and was dated to 9,500 BCE.
Egyptian sphinxes.
The largest and most famous sphinx is the Great Sphinx of Giza, situated on the Giza Plateau adjacent to the Great Pyramids of Giza on the west bank of the Nile River and facing east (). The sphinx is located southeast of the pyramids. Although the date of its construction is uncertain, the head of the Great Sphinx now is believed to be that of the pharaoh Khafra.
What names their builders gave to these statues is not known. At the Great Sphinx site, the inscription on a stele by Thutmose IV in 1400 BCE, lists the names of three aspects of the local sun deity of that period, "Khepera–Rê–Atum". The inclusion of these figures in tomb and temple complexes quickly became traditional and many pharaohs had their heads carved atop the guardian statues for their tombs to show their close relationship with the powerful solar deity, Sekhmet, a lioness. Other famous Egyptian sphinxes include one bearing the head of the pharaoh Hatshepsut, with her likeness carved in granite, which is now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and the alabaster sphinx of Memphis, Memphis, Egypt, currently located within the open-air museum at that site. The theme was expanded to form great avenues of guardian sphinxes lining the approaches to tombs and temples as well as serving as details atop the posts of flights of stairs to very grand complexes. Nine hundred with ram heads, representing Amon, were built in Thebes, where his cult was strongest.
Perhaps the first sphinx in Egypt was one depicting Queen Hetepheres II, of the fourth dynasty that lasted from 2723 BCE to 2563. She was one of the longest-lived members of the royal family of that dynasty.
The Great Sphinx has become an emblem of Egypt, frequently appearing on its stamps, coins, and official documents.
Greek traditions.
From the Bronze Age, the Hellenes had trade and cultural contacts with Egypt. Before the time that Alexander the Great occupied Egypt, the Greek name, "sphinx", was already applied to these statues. The historians and geographers of Greece wrote extensively about Egyptian culture. Herodotus called the ram-headed sphinxes Criosphinxes and called the hawk-headed ones Hieracosphinxes.
The word "sphinx" comes from the Greek Σφίγξ, apparently from the verb σφίγγω ("sphíngō"), meaning "to squeeze", "to tighten up". This name may be derived from the fact that the hunters for a pride of lions are the lionesses, and kill their prey by strangulation, biting the throat of prey and holding them down until they die. However, the historian Susan Wise Bauer suggests that the word "sphinx" was instead a Greek corruption of the Egyptian name "shesepankh", which meant "living image", and referred rather to the "statue" of the sphinx, which was carved out of "living rock" (rock that was present at the construction site, not harvested and brought from another location), than to the beast itself.
There was a single "sphinx" in Greek mythology, a unique demon of destruction and bad luck. According to Hesiod, she was a daughter of Orthrus and either Echidna or the Chimera, or perhaps even Ceto; according to others, she was a daughter of Echidna and Typhon. All of these are chthonic figures from the earliest of Greek myths, before the Olympians ruled the Greek pantheon. The Sphinx is called Phix (Φίξ) by Hesiod in line 326 of the Theogony, the proper name for the Sphinx noted by Pierre Grimal's "The Penguin Dictionary of Classical Mythology".
In Greek mythology, a sphinx is represented as a monster with a head of a woman, the body of a lioness, the wings of an eagle, and a serpent-headed tail.
The sphinx was the emblem of the ancient city-state of Chios, and appeared on seals and the obverse side of coins from the 6th century BCE until the 3rd century CE.
The Riddle of the Sphinx.
The Sphinx is said to have guarded the entrance to the Greek city of Thebes, and to have asked a riddle of travellers to allow them passage. The exact riddle asked by the Sphinx was not specified by early tellers of the stories, and was not standardized as the one given below until late in Greek history.
It was said in late lore that Hera or Ares sent the Sphinx from her Aethiopian homeland (the Greeks always remembered the foreign origin of the Sphinx) to Thebes in Greece where she asks all passersby the most famous riddle in history: "Which creature has one voice and yet becomes four-footed and two-footed and three-footed?" She strangled and devoured anyone unable to answer. Oedipus solved the riddle by answering: Man—who crawls on all fours as a baby, then walks on two feet as an adult, and then uses a walking stick in old age. By some accounts (but much more rarely), there was a second riddle: "There are two sisters: one gives birth to the other and she, in turn, gives birth to the first. Who are the two sisters?" The answer is "day and night" (both words—"ἡμέρα" and "νύξ", respectively—are feminine in Ancient Greek). This riddle is also found in a Gascon version of the myth and could be very ancient.
Bested at last, the tale continues, the Sphinx then threw herself from her high rock and died. An alternative version tells that she devoured herself. Thus Oedipus can be recognized as a "liminal" or threshold figure, helping effect the transition between the old religious practices, represented by the death of the Sphinx, and the rise of the new, Olympian gods.
In Jean Cocteau's retelling of the Oedipus legend, "The Infernal Machine", the Sphinx tells Oedipus the answer to the riddle in order to kill herself so that she did not have to kill anymore, and also to make him love her. He leaves without ever thanking her for giving him the answer to the riddle. The scene ends when the Sphinx and Anubis ascend back to the heavens.
There are mythic, anthropological, psychoanalytic and parodic interpretations of the Riddle of the Sphinx, and of Oedipus's answer to it. Sigmund Freud describes "the question of where babies come from" as a riddle of the Sphinx. Numerous riddle books use the Sphinx in their title or illustrations.
Michael Maier in his book, the "Atalanta Fugiens" (1617) writes the following remark about the Sphinx's riddle, in which he states that the solution is the Philosopher's Stone:
Sphinx is indeed reported to have had many Riddles, but this offered to Oedipus was the chief, "What is that which in the morning goeth upon four feet; upon two feet in the afternoon; and in the Evening upon three?" What was answered by Oedipus is not known. But they who interpret concerning the Ages of Man are deceived. For a Quadrangle of Four Elements are of all things first to be considered, from thence we come to the Hemisphere having two lines, a Right and a Curve, that is, to the White Luna; from thence to the Triangle which consists of Body, Soul and Spirit, or Sol, Luna and Mercury. Hence Rhasis in his Epistles, "The Stone," says he, "is a Triangle in its essence, a Quadrangle in its quality."
Sphinxes in South and Southeast Asia.
A composite mythological being with the body of a lion and the head of a human being is present in the traditions, mythology and art of South and South-East Asia. Variously known as "purushamriga" (Sanskrit, "man-beast"), "purushamirugam" (Tamil, "man-beast"), "naravirala" (Sanskrit, "man-cat") in India, or as "nara-simha" (Sanskrit, "man-lion") in Sri Lanka, "manusiha" or "manuthiha" (Pali, "man-lion") in Myanmar, and "norasingh" (from Pali, "man-lion", a variation of the Sanskrit "nara-simha") or "thep norasingh" ("man-lion deity"), or "nora nair" in Thailand.
In contrast to the sphinx in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Greece, where the traditions largely have been lost due to the discontinuity of the civilization, the traditions of the "Asian sphinx" are very much alive today. The earliest artistic depictions of "sphinxes" from the South Asian subcontinent are to some extent influenced by Hellenistic art and writings. These hail from the period when Buddhist art underwent a phase of Hellenistic influence.
In South India, the "sphinx" is known as "purushamriga" (Sanskrit) or "purushamirugam " (Tamil), meaning "human-beast". It is found depicted in sculptural art in temples and palaces where it serves an apotropaic purpose, just as the "sphinxes" in other parts of the ancient world. It is said by the tradition, to take away the sins of the devotees when they enter a temple and to ward off evil in general. It is therefore often found in a strategic position on the gopuram or temple gateway, or near the entrance of the Sanctum Sanctorum.
The "purushamriga" plays a significant role in daily as well as yearly ritual of South Indian Shaiva temples. In the shodhasha-upakaara (or sixteen honors) ritual, performed between one to six times at significant sacred moments through the day, it decorates one of the lamps of the diparadhana or lamp ceremony. And in several temples the "purushamriga" is also one of the "vahana" or vehicles of the deity during the processions of the Brahmotsava or festival.
In Kanya Kumari district, in the southernmost tip of the Indian subcontinent, during the night of Shiva Ratri, devotees run 75 kilometres while visiting and worshiping at twelve Shiva temples. This Shiva Ottam (or Run for Shiva) is performed in commemoration of the story of the race between the Sphinx and Bhima, one of the heroes of the epic "Mahabharata".
The Indian conception of a sphinx that comes closest to the classic Greek idea is in the concept of the "Sharabha", a mythical creature, part lion, part man and part bird, and the form of Sharabha that god Shiva took on to counter Narasimha's violence.
In Philippines, the sphinx is known as "nicolonia". Depicted as part man and part eagle, it is known to ask riddles to wanderers who trespass in the Bicol region. Anyone who fails to answer its riddle is said to be carried off to the Mayon Volcano where the person is said to be offered to the volcano god, Gev'ra, to appease his anger.
In Sri Lanka, the sphinx is known as "narasimha" or man-lion. As a sphinx, it has the body of a lion and the head of a human being, and is not to be confused with Narasimha, the fourth reincarnation of the deity Vishnu; this avatar or incarnation is depicted with a human body and the head of a lion. The "sphinx" narasimha is part of the Buddhist tradition and functions as a guardian of the northern direction and also was depicted on banners.
In Burma, the sphinx is known as "manussiha" ("manuthiha"). It is depicted on the corners of Buddhist stupas, and its legends tell how it was created by Buddhist monks to protect a new-born royal baby from being devoured by ogresses.
Nora Nair, Norasingh and Thep Norasingh are three of the names under which the "sphinx" is known in Thailand. They are depicted as upright walking beings with the lower body of a lion or deer, and the upper body of a human. Often they are found as female-male pairs. Here, too, the sphinx serves a protective function. It also is enumerated among the mythological creatures that inhabit the ranges of the sacred mountain Himapan.
Revived sphinxes in Europe.
The revived Mannerist sphinx of the late 15th century is sometimes thought of as the "French sphinx". Her coiffed head is erect and she has the breasts of a young woman. Often she wears ear drops and pearls as ornaments. Her body is naturalistically rendered as a recumbent lioness. Such sphinxes were revived when the "grottesche" or "grotesque" decorations of the unearthed "Domus Aurea" of Nero were brought to light in late 15th-century Rome, and she was incorporated into the classical vocabulary of arabesque designs that spread throughout Europe in engravings during the 16th and 17th centuries. Sphinxes were included in the decoration of the "loggia" of the Vatican Palace by the workshop of Raphael (1515–20), which updated the vocabulary of the Roman "grottesche".
The first appearances of sphinxes in French art are in the School of Fontainebleau in the 1520s and 1530s and she continues into the Late Baroque style of the French Régence (1715–1723).
From France, she spread throughout Europe, becoming a regular feature of the outdoors decorative sculpture of 18th-century palace gardens, as in the Upper Belvedere Palace in Vienna, Sanssouci Park in Potsdam, La Granja in Spain, Branicki Palace in Białystok, or the late Rococo examples in the grounds of the Portuguese Queluz National Palace (of perhaps the 1760s), with ruffs and clothed chests ending with a little cape.
Sphinxes are a feature of the neoclassical interior decorations of Robert Adam and his followers, returning closer to the undressed style of the "grottesche". They had an equal appeal to artists and designers of the Romantic, and later Symbolism movements in the 19th century. Most of these sphinxes alluded to the Greek sphinx, rather than the Egyptian, although they may not have wings.
Sphinxes in Freemasonry.
The sphinx image also has been adopted into Masonic architecture. Among the Egyptians, sphinxes were placed at the entrance of the temple to guard the mysteries, by warning those who penetrated within that they should conceal a knowledge of them from the uninitiated. Champollion says that the sphinx became successively the symbol of each of the gods, by which portal suggests that the priests intended to express the idea that all the gods were hidden from the people, and that the knowledge of them, guarded in the sanctuaries, was revealed to the initiates only. As a Masonic emblem, the sphinx has been adopted in its Egyptian character as a symbol of mystery, and as such often is found as a decoration sculptured in front of Masonic temples, or engraved at the head of Masonic documents. It cannot, however, be properly called an ancient, recognized symbol of the order. Its introduction has been of comparatively recent date, and rather as a symbolic decoration than as a symbol of any particular dogma. 
See also.
Similar hybrid creatures

</doc>
<doc id="83079" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83079" title="Sterope">
Sterope

Sterope (, from , "steropē", lightning) was the name of several individuals in Greek mythology:

</doc>
<doc id="83082" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83082" title="Hippothoe">
Hippothoe

In Greek mythology, Hippothoe is the name of five distinct characters.
Hippothoe is also the scientific name of "Lycaena hippothoe", the "Purple-edged Copper" butterfly [http://www.leps.it/indexjs.htm?SpeciesPages/LycaenHippot.htm].

</doc>
<doc id="83083" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83083" title="Taphius">
Taphius

In Greek mythology, Taphius founded the city Taphos on the island of the same name, and was its king. He also gave his name to the Taphians, a people that inhabited Taphos and nearby islands, which formed part of Odysseus's kingdom at the time of the Trojan War. According to one genealogy, Taphius was the son of Poseidon and Hippothoë (daughter of Mestor, son of Perseus). However, according to another (more plausible) genealogy Taphius's father was Pterelaus, the son of Lelex, who ruled in Acarnania. Both versions agree that Taphius had a son, also called Pterelaus ('Pterelaus II').

</doc>
<doc id="83084" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83084" title="Taras (mythology)">
Taras (mythology)

Taras (Τάρας) was, according to Greek mythology, the son of Poseidon and of the nymph Satyrion.
Taras is the eponymous founder of the Greek colony of Taras (Tarentum, modern Taranto), in Magna Graecia (today South Italy). Note that a harbour close by Taranto is still called Torre Saturo (derived from Satyrion).
It was in Torre Saturo, almost 15 km south of Taranto, that Spartan colonists settled their first colony in Taranto zone. Later, around 706 BC, they conquered the Iapygian city of Taranto.
On the coinage of the ancient city of Taras, the son of Poseidon is depicted on a dolphin, sometimes with his father's trident in one hand; the same image is depicted on the modern city emblem.
'"Story:
Taras was rescued from a shipwreck by a dolphin sent by his father. The city, located on the site where he was brought ashore, was named in his honor. The horsemen, who range from boys to youths, nude to armed, are engaged in a wide variety of activities, possibly alluding to the many equestrian athletic events held at Taras.
Said to have traversed the sea from the promontory of Taenarum to the south of Italy, riding on a dolphin, and to have founded Tarentum in Italy where he was worshipped as a hero.
"'References:

</doc>
<doc id="83085" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83085" title="Tarentum">
Tarentum

Tarentum may refer to: 

</doc>
<doc id="83086" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83086" title="Calydonian Boar">
Calydonian Boar

The Calydonian or Aetolian Boar () is one of the monsters of Greek mythology that had to be overcome by heroes of the Olympian age. Sent by Artemis to ravage the region of Calydon in Aetolia because its king failed to honor her in his rites to the gods, it was killed in the Calydonian Hunt, in which many male heroes took part, but also a powerful woman, Atalanta, who won its hide by first wounding it with an arrow. This outraged some of the men, with tragic results. Strabo was under the impression that the Calydonian Boar was an offspring of the Crommyonian Sow vanquished by Theseus.
Importance in Greek mythology and art.
The Calydonian Boar is one of the chthonic monsters in Greek mythology, each set in a specific locale. Sent by Artemis to ravage the region of Calydon in Aetolia, it met its end in the Calydonian Hunt, in which all the heroes of the new age pressed to take part, with the exception of Heracles, who vanquished his own Goddess-sent Erymanthian Boar separately. Since the mythic event drew together numerous heroes—among whom were many who were venerated as progenitors of their local ruling houses among tribal groups of Hellenes into Classical times—the Calydonian Boar hunt offered a natural subject in classical art, for it was redolent with the web of myth that gathered around its protagonists on other occasions, around their half-divine descent and their offspring. Like the quest for the Golden Fleece ("Argonautica") or the Trojan War that took place the following generation, the Calydonian Hunt is one of the nodes in which much Greek myth comes together.
Both Homer and Hesiod and their listeners were aware of the details of this myth, but no surviving complete account exists: some papyrus fragments found at Oxyrhynchus are all that survive of Stesichorus' telling; the myth repertory called "Bibliotheke" ("The Library") contains the gist of the tale, and before that was compiled the Roman poet Ovid told the story in some colorful detail in his "Metamorphoses".
Hunt.
King Oeneus ("wine man") of Calydon, an ancient city of west-central Greece north of the Gulf of Patras, held annual harvest sacrifices to the gods on the sacred hill. One year the king forgot to include Great "Artemis of the Golden Throne" in his offerings Insulted, Artemis, the "Lady of the Bow", loosed the biggest, most ferocious boar imaginable on the countryside of Calydon. It rampaged throughout the countryside, destroying vineyards and crops, forcing people to take refuge inside the city walls, where they began to starve.
Oeneus sent messengers out to look for the best hunters in Greece, offering them the boar's pelt and tusks as a prize.
Among those who responded were some of the Argonauts, Oeneus' own son Meleager, and, remarkably for the Hunt's eventual success, one woman— the huntress Atalanta, the "indomitable", who had been suckled by Artemis as a she-bear and raised as a huntress, a proxy for Artemis herself (Kerenyi; Ruck and Staples). Artemis appears to have been divided in her motives, for it was also said that she had sent the young huntress because she knew her presence would be a source of division, and so it was: many of the men, led by Kepheus and Ankaios, refused to hunt alongside a woman. It was the smitten Meleager who convinced them. Nonetheless it was Atalanta who first succeeded in wounding the boar with an arrow, although Meleager finished it off, and offered the prize to Atalanta, who had drawn first blood. But the sons of Thestios, who considered it disgraceful that a woman should get the trophy where men were involved, took the skin from her, saying that it was properly theirs by right of birth, if Meleager chose not to accept it. Outraged by this, Meleager slew the sons of Thestios and again gave the skin to Atalanta ("Bibliotheke"). Meleager's mother, sister of Meleager's slain uncles, took the fatal brand from the chest where she had kept it (see Meleager) and threw it once more on the fire; as it was consumed, Meleager died on the spot, as the Fates had foretold. Thus Artemis achieved her revenge against King Oeneus.
During the hunt, Peleus accidentally killed his host Eurytion. In the course of the hunt and its aftermath, many of the hunters turned upon one another, contesting the spoils, and so the Goddess continued to be revenged (Kerenyi, 114): "But the goddess again made a great stir of anger and crying battle, over the head of the boar and the bristling boar's hide, between Kouretes and the high-hearted Aitolians" (Homer, "Iliad", IX 543).
The boar's hide that was preserved in the Temple of Athena Alea at Tegea in Laconia was reputedly that of the Calydonian Boar, "rotted by age and by now altogether without bristles" by the time Pausanias saw it in the second century CE. He noted that the tusks had been taken to Rome as booty from the defeated allies of Mark Anthony by Augustus; "one of the tusks of the Calydonian boar has been broken", Pausanias reports, "but the remaining one, having a circumference of about half a fathom, was dedicated in the Emperor's gardens, in a shrine of Dionysos". The Calydonian Hunt was the theme of the temple's main pediment.
Hunters.
The heroes who participated assembled from all over Hellas, according to Homer; Bacchylides called them "the best of the Hellenes".
The table lists:

</doc>
<doc id="83089" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83089" title="Taygete">
Taygete

In Classical Greek mythology, Taygete (; Greek Ταϋγέτη , Modern. ) was a nymph, one of the Pleiades according to the "Bibliotheca" (3.10.1) and a companion of Artemis, in her archaic role as "potnia theron", "Mistress of the animals", with its likely roots in prehistory. Mount Taygetos in Laconia, dedicated to the goddess, was her haunt. 
As he mastered each of the local nymphs one by one, Olympic Zeus pursued Taygete, who invoked her protectress Artemis. The goddess turned Taygete into a doe with golden horns, any distinction between the Titaness in her human form and in her doe form is blurred: the nymph who hunted the doe in the company of Artemis "is" the doe herself. As Pindar conceived the myth-element in his third Olympian Ode, "the doe with the golden horns, which once Taygete had inscribed as a sacred dedication to Artemis Orthosia", ("right-minded" Artemis) was the very Ceryneian Hind that Heracles later pursued. For the poet, the transformation was incomplete, and the doe-form had become an offering. Pindar, who was a very knowledgeable mythographer, hints that the mythic doe, even when slain and offered to Artemis, also "continues to exist", to be hunted once again (although not killed) by Heracles at a later time. Karl Kerenyi points out ("The Heroes of the Greeks") "It is not easy to differentiate between the divine beast, the heroine and the goddess".
According to Pausanias (iii. 1, 2, etc.) Taygete conceived Lacedaemon, the mythical founder of Sparta, through Zeus, and Eurotas. Pausanias noted, at Amyclae, that the rape of Taygete was represented on the throne.
According to Pseudo-Plutarch, Taygete was the wife of Lacedaemon, sometimes referred to as Sparta, whose name was given to the city of Sparta. Their son was named Himerus.

</doc>
<doc id="83090" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83090" title="Telemus">
Telemus

Telemus ( "Telemos") was a figure of Greek mythology, a prophet, son of Eurymus. Telemus warned the Cyclops Polyphemus that he would lose his sight to a man named Odysseus.

</doc>
<doc id="83094" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83094" title="Tereus">
Tereus

In Ancient Greek myth, Tereus () was a Thracian king, the son of Ares and husband of Procne. Procne and Tereus had a son, Itys.
Tereus desired his wife's sister, Philomelanonkiaid. He forced himself upon her, then cut her tongue out and held her captive so she could never tell anyone. He told his wife that her sister had died. Philomela wove letters in a tapestry depicting Tereus's crime and sent it secretly to Procne. In revenge, Procne killed Itys and served his flesh in a meal to his father Tereus. When Tereus learned what she had done, he tried to kill the sisters but all three were changed by the Olympian Gods into birds: Tereus became a hoopoe; Procne became the nightingale whose song is a song of mourning for the loss of her child; Philomela became the swallow.
Other versions of this myth have Procne transformed into the swallow and Philomela into a nightingale (Hyginus, "Fabulae", 45).
Tereus was also a common given name among Thracians.
The Attic playwrights Sophocles and Philocles both wrote plays entitled "Tereus" on the subject of the story of Tereus.
Shakespeare refers to Tereus in "Titus Andronicus", after Chiron and Demetrius have raped Lavinia and cut out her tongue and also both her hands.

</doc>
<doc id="83096" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83096" title="Philomela">
Philomela

Philomela or Philomel (, "Philomēlē") is a minor figure in Greek mythology and is frequently invoked as a direct and figurative symbol in literary, artistic, and musical works in the Western canon.
She is identified as being the "princess of Athens" and the younger of two daughters of Pandion I, King of Athens, and Zeuxippe. Her sister, Procne, was the wife of King Tereus of Thrace. While the myth has several variations, the general depiction is that Philomela, after being raped and mutilated by her sister's husband, Tereus, obtains her revenge and is transformed into a nightingale ("Luscinia megarhynchos"), a migratory passerine bird native to Europe and southwest Asia and noted for its song. Because of the violence associated with the myth, the song of the nightingale is often depicted or interpreted as a sorrowful lament. Coincidentally, in nature, the female nightingale is mute and only the male of the species sings.
Ovid and other writers have made the association (either fancifully or mistakenly) that the etymology of her name was "lover of song," derived from the Greek and ("song") instead of ("fruit" or "sheep"). The name means "lover of fruit," "lover of apples," or "lover of sheep."
The story of Philomela in myth.
The most complete and extant rendering of the story of Philomela, Procne, and Tereus can be found in Book VI of the "Metamorphoses" of the Roman poet Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 BC - AD 17/18), where the story reaches its full development during antiquity. It is likely that Ovid relied upon Greek and Latin sources that were available in his era such as the "Bibliotheca" of Pseudo-Apollodorus (2nd century BC), or sources that are no longer extant or exist today only in fragments—especially Sophocles' tragic drama "Tereus" (5th century BC).
According to Ovid, in the fifth year of Procne's marriage to Tereus, King of Thrace and son of Ares, she asked her husband to "Let me at Athens my dear sister see / Or let her come to Thrace, and visit me." Indulging his wife's request, Tereus agreed to travel to Athens and escort Philomela, his wife's sister, to Thrace. King Pandion of Athens, the father of Philomela and Procne, was apprehensive about letting his only remaining daughter leave his home and protection and asks Tereus to protect her as if he were her father. Tereus agrees. However, Tereus lusted for Philomela when he first saw her, and that lust grew during the course of the return voyage to Thrace.
Arriving in Thrace, he forced her to a cabin or lodge in the woods and raped her. After the assault, Tereus threatened her and advised her to keep silent. Philomela was defiant and angered Tereus. In his rage, he cut out her tongue and abandoned her in the cabin. In Ovid's "Metamorphoses" Philomela's defiant speech is rendered (in an 18th-century English translation) as:
<poem>
Still my revenge shall take its proper time,
And suit the baseness of your hellish crime.
My self, abandon'd, and devoid of shame,
Thro' the wide world your actions will proclaim;
Or tho' I'm prison'd in this lonely den,
Obscur'd, and bury'd from the sight of men,
My mournful voice the pitying rocks shall move,
And my complainings echo thro' the grove.
Hear me, o Heav'n! and, if a God be there,
Let him regard me, and accept my pray'r.</poem>
Rendered unable to speak because of her injuries, Philomela wove a tapestry (or a robe) that told her story and had it sent to Procne. Procne was incensed and in revenge, she killed her son by Tereus, Itys (or Itylos), boiled him and served him as a meal to her husband. After Tereus ate Itys, the sisters presented him with the severed head of his son, and he became aware of their conspiracy and his cannibalistic meal. He snatched up an axe and pursued them with the intent to kill the sisters. They fled but were almost overtaken by Tereus at Daulia in Phocis. In desperation, they prayed to the gods to be turned into birds and escape Tereus' rage and vengeance. The gods transformed Procne into a swallow and Philomela into a nightingale. Subsequently, the gods would transform Tereus into a hoopoe.
Variations on the myth.
It is typical for myths from antiquity to have been altered over the passage of time or for competing variations of the myth to emerge. With the story of Philomela, most of the variations concern which sister became the nightingale or the swallow, and into what type of bird Tereus was transformed. Since Ovid's "Metamorphoses", it has been generally accepted that Philomela was transformed into a nightingale, and Procne into a swallow. The description of Tereus as an "epops" has generally been translated as a hoopoe (scientific name: "Upupa epops"). Since many of the earlier sources are no longer extant, or remain only fragments, Ovid's version of the myth has been the most lasting and influenced most later works.
Early Greek sources have it that Philomela was turned into a swallow, which has no song; Procne turns into a nightingale, singing a beautiful but sad song in remorse. Later sources, among them Ovid, Hyginus, and the "Bibliotheca" of Pseudo-Apollodorus, and in modern literature the English romantic poets like Keats write that although she was tongueless, Philomela was turned into a nightingale, and Procne into a swallow. Eustathius' version of the story has the sisters reversed, so that Philomela married Tereus and that Tereus lusted after Procne.
It is salient to note that in taxonomy and binomial nomenclature, the genus name of the martins (the larger-bodied among swallow genera) is "Progne", a Latinized form of Procne. Other related genera named after the myth include the Crag Martins "Ptyonoprogne", and Saw-wings "Psalidoprocne". Coincidentally, although most of the depictions of the nightingale and its song in art and literature are of female nightingales, the female of the species does not sing—it is the male of the species who sings its characteristic song.
In an early account, Sophocles wrote that Tereus was turned into a large-beaked bird whom some scholars translate as a hawk while a number of retellings and other works (including Aristophanes' ancient comedy, "The Birds") hold that Tereus was instead changed into a hoopoe. Various later translations of Ovid state that Tereus was transformed into other birds than the hawk and hoopoe, including references by Dryden and Gower to the lapwing.
Several writers omit key details of the story. According to Pausanias, Tereus was so remorseful for his actions against Philomela and Itys (the nature of the actions is not described) that he kills himself. Then two birds appear as the women lament his death. Many later sources omit the Tereus' tongue-cutting mutilation of Philomela altogether.
According to Thucydides, Tereus was not King of Thrace, but rather from the city of Daulia in Phocis, a city inhabited by Thracians. He cites in proof of this that poets who mention the nightingale refer to it as a "Daulian bird." It is thought that Thucydides commented on the myth in his famous work on the Peloponnesian War because Sophocles' play confused the mythical Tereus with contemporary ruler Teres I of Thrace.
Elements borrowed from other myths and stories.
The story of Philomela, Procne and Tereus is largely influenced by the lost tragedy "Tereus" of Sophocles. Scholar Jenny Marsh claims that Sophocles borrowed certain plot elements from Euripides drama "Medea"—notably a wife killing her child in an act of revenge against her husband—and incorporated them in his tragedy "Tereus". She implies that the infanticide of Itys did not appear in the Tereus myth until Sophocles' play and that it was introduced because of what was borrowed from Euripides.
It is possible that social and political themes have woven their way into the story as a contrast between Athenians who believed themselves to be the hegemonic power in Greece and the more civilized of the Greek peoples, and the Thracians who were considered to be a "barbaric race." It is possible that these elements were woven into Sophocles' play "Tereus" and other works of the period.
Appearances in the Western canon.
The material of the Philomela myth has been used in various creative works—artistic and literary—for the past 2,500 years. Over the centuries, the myth has been associated with the image of the nightingale and its song described as both exceedingly beautiful and sorrowful. The continued use of the image in artistic, literary, and musical works has reinforced this association.
From antiquity and the influence of Ovid.
Beginning with Homer's "Odyssey", ancient dramatists and poets evoked the story of Philomela and the nightingale in their works. Most notably, it was the core of the tragedy "Tereus" by Sophocles (lost, extant only in fragments), and later in a set of plays by Philocles, the nephew of the great playwright Aeschylus. In Aeschylus's "Agamemnon", the prophetess Cassandra has a visionary premonition of her own death in which she mentioned the nightingale and Itys, lamenting:
<poem>
Ah for thy fate, O shrill-voiced nightingale!
Some solace for thy woes did Heaven afford,
Clothed thee with soft brown plumes, and life apart from wail(ing)—
</poem>
In his "Poetics", Aristotle points to the ″voice of the shuttle″ in Sophocles′ tragedy "Tereus" as an example of a poetic device that aids in the ″recognition″—the change from ignorance to knowledge—of what has happened earlier in the plot. Such a device, according to Aristotle, is ″contrived″ by the poet, and thus is ″inartistic.″. The connection between the nightingale's song and poetry is evoked by Aristophanes in his comedy "The Birds" and in the poetry of Callimachus. Roman poet Virgil compares the mourning of Orpheus for Eurydice to the “lament of the nightingale”.
While Ovid's retelling of the myth is the more famous version of the story, he had several ancient sources on which to rely before he finished the Metamorphoses in A.D. 8. Many of these sources were doubtless available to Ovid during his lifetime but have been lost or come to us at present only in fragments. In his version, Ovid recast and combined many elements from these ancient sources. Because his is the most complete, lasting version of the myth, it is the basis for many later works.
In the 12th century, French trouvère (troubadour) Chrétien de Troyes, adapted many of the myths recounted in Ovid's "Metamorphoses" into Old French. However, de Troyes was not alone in making use of Ovid's material. Geoffrey Chaucer recounted the story in his unfinished work "The Legend of Good Women" and briefly alluded to the myth in his "Troilus and Criseyde". John Gower included the tale in his "Confessio Amantis". References to Philomela are common in the motets of the ars nova, ars subtilior, and ars mutandi musical eras of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries.
In Elizabethean and Jacobean England.
Throughout the late Renaissance and Elizabethean eras, the image of Philomela and the nightingale incorporated elements of mourning and beauty after being subjected to an act of violence. In the long poem "The Steele Glas" (1576), poet George Gascoigne (1535–1577) depicts "Philomel" as the representative of poetry (Poesys), her sister Progne as satire (Satyra), and Tereus as "vayne Delight." The characterization of Philomela and the nightingale was that of a woman choosing to exercise her will in recovering her voice and resisting those forces which attempts to silence her. Critics have pointed to Gascoigne's use of the Philomela myth as a personal appeal and that he was fighting in verse a battle with his enemies who violently opposed his poems. In his poem "The complaynt of Philomene" (1576), the myth is employed to depict punishment and control.
In "The Nymph's Reply to the Shepherd", Sir Walter Raleigh (1554–1618) relays consolation regarding the nymph's harsh rejection of the shepherd's romantic advances in the spirit of "time heals all wounds," by citing in the second stanza (among several examples) that eventually with the passage of time Philomel would become "dumb" to her own pain and that her attention would be drawn away from the pain by the events of life to come.
In Sir Philip Sidney's (1554–1586) courtly love poem "The Nightingale", Sydney's narrator who is in love with a woman he cannot have compares his own romantic situation to that of Philomela's plight and claims that he has more reason to be sad. However, recent literary criticism has labelled this claim as sexist and an unfortunate marginalization of the traumatic rape of Philomela. Sydney argues that the rape was an "excess of love" and less severe than being deprived of love as attested by the line, "Since wanting is more woe than too much having."
Playwright and poet William Shakespeare (1564–1616) makes frequent use of the Philomela myth—most notably in his tragedy "Titus Andronicus" (c. 1588–1593) where characters directly reference Tereus and Philomela in commenting on rape and mutilation of Lavinia by Aaron, Chiron, and Demetrius. Prominent allusions to Philomela also occur in the depiction of Lucrece in "The Rape of Lucrece", in the depiction of Imogen in "Cymbeline," and in Titania's lullaby in "A Midsummer Night's Dream" where she asks Philomel to "sing in our sweet lullaby". In Sonnet 102, Shakespeare addresses his lover (the "fair youth") and compares his love poetry to the song of the nightingale, noting that "her mournful hymns did hush the night" (line 10), and that as a poet would "hold his tongue" (line 13) in deference to the more beautiful nightingale's song so that he "not dull you with my song" (line 14). Emilia Lanyer (1569–1645), a poet who is considered by some scholars to be the woman referred to in the poetry of William Shakespeare as "Dark Lady", makes several references to Philomela in her patronage poem "The Description of Cookeham" in "Salve Deus Rex Judaeorum" (1611). Lanyer's poem, dedicated to Margaret Clifford, Countess of Cumberland and her daughter Lady Anne Clifford refers to Philomela's "sundry layes"(line 31) and later to her "mournful ditty" (line 189).
The image of the nightingale appears frequently in poetry of the period with it and its song described by poets as an example of "joyance" and gaiety or as an example of melancholy, sad, sorrowful, and mourning. However, many use the nightingale as a symbol of sorrow but without a direct reference to the Philomela myth.
In Classical and Romantic works.
Poets in the Romantic Era recast the myth and adapted the image of the nightingale with its song to be a poet and “master of a superior art that could inspire the human poet”. For some romantic poets, the nightingale even began to take on qualities of the muse. John Keats (1795–1821), in "Ode to a Nightingale" (1819) idealizes the nightingale as a poet who has achieved the poetry that Keats himself longs to write. Keats directly employs the Philomel myth in "The Eve of St. Agnes" (1820) where the rape of Madeline by Porphyro mirrors the rape of Philomela by Tereus. Keats' contemporary, poet Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822) invoked a similar image of the nightingale, writing in his "A Defence of Poetry" that "a poet is a nightingale who sits in darkness and sings to cheer its own solitude with sweet sounds; his auditors are as men entranced by the melody of an unseen musician, who feel that they are moved and softened, yet know not whence or why.”
First published in the collection "Lyrical Ballads", "The Nightingale" (1798) is an effort by Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834) to move away from associations that the nightingale's song was one of melancholy and identified it with the joyous experience of nature. He remarked that "in nature there is nothing melancholy," (line 15) expressing hope "we may not thus profane / Nature’s sweet voices, always full of love / And joyance!" (lines 40–42).
At the poem's conclusion, Coleridge writes of a father taking his crying son outside in the night:
<poem>
And he beheld the moon, and, hushed at once,
Suspends his sobs, and laughs most silently,
While his fair eyes, that swam with undropped tears,'
Did glitter in the yellow moon-beam! Well!—
It is a father’s tale: But if that Heaven
Should give me life, his childhood shall grow up
Familiar with these songs, that with the night
He may associate joy.—
</poem>
Coleridge, and his friend William Wordsworth (1770–1850) who called the nightingale a "fiery heart," depicted the bird "as an instance of natural poetic creation," and as the "voice of nature."
Other notable mentions include:
In modern works.
The Philomela myth is perpetuated largely through its appearance as a powerful device in poetry. In the 20th century, American-British poet T. S. Eliot (1888–1965) directly referenced the myth in his most famous poem, "The Waste Land" (1922), where he describes,
<poem>
The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king
So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale
Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
"Jug Jug" to dirty ears.
</poem>
Eliot employs the myth to depict themes of sorrow, pain, and that the only recovery or regeneration possible is through revenge. Several of these mentions reference other poets' renderings of the myth, including those of Ovid and Gascoigne. Eliot's references to the nightingales singing by the convent in "Sweeney and the Nightingales" (1919–1920) is a direct reference the murder of Agamemnon in the tragedy by Aeschylus—wherein the Greek dramatist directly evoked the Philomela myth. The poem describes Sweeney as a brute and that two women in the poem are conspiring against him for his mistreatment of them. This mirrors not only the elements of Agamemnon's death in Aeschylus' play but the sister's revenge against Tereus in the myth.
In the poem "To the Nightingale", Argentine poet and fabulist, Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986), who compares his efforts as a poet to the bird's lament though never having heard it. He describes its song as "encrusted with mythology" and that the evolution of the myth has distorted it—that the opinions of other poets and writers have kept both poet and reader from actually hearing the original sound and knowing the essence of the song.
Several artists have applied Ovid's account to new translations or reworkings, or adapted the story for the stage. British poet Ted Hughes (1930–1998) used the myth in his 1997 work "Tales from Ovid" (1997) which was a loose translation and retelling of twenty-four tales from Ovid's "Metamorphoses". Both Israeli dramatist Hanoch Levin (in "The Great Whore of Babylon") and English playwright Joanna Laurens (in "The Three Birds") wrote plays based on the story. Most recently the story was adapted into an opera by Scottish composer James Dillon in 2004 and a 1964 vocal composition by American composer Milton Babbitt with text by John Hollander.
Several female writers have used the Philomela myth as a vehicle for exploring the subject of rape, women and power (empowerment), and feminist themes, including novelist Margaret Atwood in her novella "Nightingale" published in "The Tent" (2006), Emma Tennant in her story "Philomela", Jeannine Hall Gailey who uses the myth in several poems published in "Becoming the Villainess" (2006), and Timberlake Wertenbaker in her play "The Love of the Nightingale" (1989) (later adapted into an opera of the same name composed by Richard Mills).

</doc>
<doc id="83099" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83099" title="Thamyris">
Thamyris

In Greek mythology, Thamyris (), son of Philammon and the nymph Argiope, was a Thracian singer who was so proud of his skill that he boasted he could outsing the Muses. He competed against them and lost. As punishment for his presumption they blinded him, and took away his ability to make poetry and to play the lyre. This outline of the story is told in the "Iliad".
This allusion is taken up in Euripides' "Rhesus", in the "Library" attributed to Apollodorus, and in the Scholia on the "Iliad". These later sources add the details that Thamyris had claimed as his prize, if he should win the contest, the privilege of having sex with all the Muses (according to one version) or of marrying one of them (according to another); and that after his death he was further punished in Hades. The story legendarily demonstrates that poetic inspiration, a gift of the gods, can be taken away by the gods.
According to Diodorus the mythical singer Linus took three pupils: Heracles, Thamyris, and Orpheus, which neatly settles Thamyris's legendary chronology. When Pliny the Elder briefly sketches the origins of music he credits Thamyris with inventing the Dorian mode and with being the first to play the cithara as a solo instrument with no voice accompaniment.
A lost epic attributed to Thamyris, Titanomachy, was mentioned in passing in the essay "On Music" that was once believed to be authored by Plutarch.
Thamyris is said to have been a lover of Hyacinth and thus to have been the first man to have loved another male.
Thamyris is another name for the ancient Greek painter Timarete and also the name of a Theban who was killed by Actor.
Thamyris Glacier on Anvers Island in Antarctica is named after Thamyris.

</doc>
<doc id="83101" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83101" title="Metamorphoses">
Metamorphoses

The Metamorphoses (: "Books of Transformations") is a Latin narrative poem by the Roman poet Ovid, considered his "magnum opus". Comprising fifteen books and over 250 myths, the poem chronicles the history of the world from its creation to the deification of Julius Caesar within a loose mythico-historical framework.
Although meeting the criteria for an epic, the poem defies simple genre classification by its use of varying themes and tones. Ovid took inspiration from the genre of metamorphosis poetry, and some of the "Metamorphoses" derives from earlier treatment of the same myths; however, he diverged significantly from all of his models.
One of the most influential works in Western culture, the "Metamorphoses" has inspired such authors as Dante, Boccaccio, Chaucer, and Shakespeare. Numerous episodes from the poem have been depicted in acclaimed works of sculpture, painting, and music. Although interest in Ovid faded after the Renaissance, towards the end of the twentieth century there was a resurgence of attention to his work; today, the "Metamorphoses" continues to inspire and be retold through various media. The work has been the subject of numerous translations into English, the first by William Caxton in 1480.
Sources and models.
Ovid's decision to make myth the dominant subject of the "Metamorphoses" was influenced by the predisposition of Alexandrian poetry. However, whereas it served in that tradition as the cause for moral reflection or insight, he made it instead the "object of play and artful manipulation". The model for a collection of metamorphosis myths derived from a pre-existing genre of metamorphosis poetry in the Hellenistic tradition, of which the earliest known example is Boio(s)' "Ornithogonia" — a now-fragmentary poem collecting myths about the metamorphoses of humans into birds.
There are three examples of the "Metamorphoses" by later Hellenistic writers, but little is known of their contents. The "Heteroioumena" by Nicander of Colophon is better known, and clearly an influence on the poem — 21 of the stories from this work were treated in the "Metamorphoses". However, in a way that was typical for writers of the period, Ovid diverged significantly from his models. The "Metamorphoses" was longer than any previous collection of metamorphosis myths (Nicander's work consisted of probably four or five books) and positioned itself within a historical framework.
Some of the "Metamorphoses" derives from earlier literary and poetic treatment of the same myths. This material was of varying quality and comprehensiveness — while some of it was "finely worked", in other cases Ovid may have been working from limited material. In the case of an oft-used myth such as that of Io in Book I, which was the subject of literary adaptation as early as the fifth century BC, and as recently as a generation prior to his own, Ovid reorganises and innovates existing material in order to foreground his favoured topics and to embody the key themes of the "Metamorphoses".
Contents.
Scholars have found it difficult to place the "Metamorphoses" in a genre. The poem has been considered as an epic or a type of epic (for example, an anti-epic or mock-epic); a "Kollektivgedicht" that pulls together a series of examples in miniature form, such as the epyllion; a sampling of one genre after another; or a narrative that refuses categorization.
The poem is generally considered to meet the criteria for an epic; it is considerably long, relating over 250 narratives across fifteen books; it is composed in dactylic hexameter, the meter of both the ancient "Iliad" and "Odyssey", and the more contemporary epic "Aeneid"; and it treats the high literary subject of myth. However, the poem "handles the themes and employs the tone of virtually
every species of literature", ranging from epic and elegy to tragedy and pastoral.
Commenting on the genre debate, G. Karl Galinsky has opined that "... it would be misguided to pin the label of any genre on the "Metamorphoses"."
The "Metamorphoses" is comprehensive in its chronology, recounting the creation of the world to the death of Julius Caesar, which had occurred only a year before Ovid's birth; it has been compared to works of universal history, which became important in the first century BC. In spite of its apparently unbroken chronology, scholar Brooks Otis has identified four divisions in the narrative:
Ovid works his way through his subject matter, often in an apparently arbitrary fashion, by jumping from one transformation tale to another, sometimes retelling what had come to be seen as central events in the world of Greek mythology and sometimes straying in odd directions. It begins with the ritual "invocation of the muse", and makes use of traditional epithets and circumlocutions. But instead of following and extolling the deeds of a human hero, it leaps from story to story with little connection.
The recurring theme, as with nearly all of Ovid's work, is love—be it personal love or love personified in the figure of "Amor" (Cupid). Indeed, the other Roman gods are repeatedly perplexed, humiliated, and made ridiculous by Amor, an otherwise relatively minor god of the pantheon, who is the closest thing this putative mock-epic has to a hero. Apollo comes in for particular ridicule as Ovid shows how irrational love can confound the god out of reason. The work as a whole inverts the accepted order, elevating humans and human passions while making the gods and their desires and conquests objects of low humor.
The "Metamorphoses" ends with an epilogue (Book XV.871–9), one of only two surviving Latin epics to do so (the other being Statius' "Thebiad"). The ending acts as a declaration that everything except his poetry—even Rome—must give way to change:
Themes.
The different genres and divisions in the narrative allow the "Metamorphoses" to display a wide range of themes. Scholar Stephen M. Wheeler notes that "Metamorphosis, mutability, love, violence, artistry, and power are just some of the unifying themes that critics have proposed over the years." 
Metamorphosis.
Metamorphosis or transformation is a unifying theme amongst the episodes of the "Metamorphoses". Ovid raises its significance explicitly in the opening lines of the poem: "In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas / corpora;" ("I intend to speak of forms changed into new entities;"). Accompanying this theme is often violence, inflicted upon a victim whose transformation becomes part of the natural landscape. This theme amalgamates the much-explored opposition between the hunter and the hunted and the thematic tension between art and nature.
There is a huge variety among the types of transformations that take place: from human to inanimate object (Nileus), constellation (Ariadne's Crown), animal (Perdix); from animal (Ants) and fungus (Mushrooms) to human; of sex (Hyenas); and of colour (Pebbles). The metamorphoses themselves are often located metatextually within the poem, through grammatical or narratorial transformations. At other times, transformations are developed into humour or absurdity, such that, slowly, “the reader realizes he is being had”, or the very nature of transformation is questioned or subverted. This phenomenon is merely one aspect of Ovid's extensive use of illusion and disguise.
Influence.
The "Metamorphoses" has exerted a considerable influence on literature and the arts, particularly of the West; scholar A. D. Melville says that "It may be doubted whether any poem has had so great an influence on the literature and art of Western civilization as the "Metamorphoses"." Although a majority of its stories do not originate with Ovid himself, but with such writers as Hesiod and Homer, for others the poem is their sole source.
The influence of the poem on the works of Geoffrey Chaucer is extensive. In "The Canterbury Tales", the story of Coronis and Phoebus Apollo (Book II 531–632) is adapted to form the basis for The Manciple's Tale. The story of Midas (Book XI 174–193) is referred to and appears—though much altered—in The Wife of Bath's Tale.
The story of Ceyx and Alcyone (from Book IX) is adapted by Chaucer in his poem "The Book of the Duchess", written to commemorate the death of Blanche, Duchess of Lancaster and wife of John of Gaunt.
The "Metamorphoses" was a considerable influence on English playwright William Shakespeare. His "Romeo and Juliet" is influenced by the story of Pyramus and Thisbe ("Metamorphoses" Book IV); and, in "A Midsummer Night's Dream", a band of amateur actors performs a play about Pyramus and Thisbe. Shakespeare's early erotic poem "Venus and Adonis" expands on the myth in Book X of the "Metamorphoses". In "Titus Andronicus", the story of Lavinia's rape is drawn from Tereus' rape of Philomela, and the text of the "Metamorphoses" is used within the play to enable Titus to interpret his daughter's story. Most of Prospero's renunciative speech in Act V of "The Tempest" is taken word-for-word from a speech by Medea in Book VII of the "Metamorphoses". Among other English writers for whom the "Metamorphoses" was an inspiration are John Milton—who made use of it in "Paradise Lost", his "magnum opus", and evidently knew it well—and Edmund Spenser. In Europe, the poem was an influence on Giovanni Boccaccio (the story of Pyramus and Thisbe appears in his poem "L'Amorosa Fiammetta") and Dante.
During the Renaissance period, mythological subjects were frequently depicted in art. The "Metamorphoses" was the greatest source of these narratives, such that the term "Ovidian" in this context is synonymous for mythological, in spite of some frequently represented myths not being found in the work. Many of the stories from the "Metamorphoses" have been the subject of paintings and sculptures, particularly during this period. Some of the most well-known paintings by Titian depict scenes from the poem, including "Diana and Callisto", "Diana and Actaeon", and "Death of Actaeon". Other famous works inspired by it include Pieter Brueghel's painting "Landscape with the Fall of Icarus" and Gian Lorenzo Bernini's sculpture "Apollo and Daphne". The "Metamorphoses" also permeated the theory of art during the Renaissance and the Baroque style, with its idea of transformation and the relation of the myths of Pygmalion and Narcissus to the role of the artist.
Popular for many centuries, interest in Ovid began to wane after the Renaissance, and his influence on the nineteenth century was minimal. Towards the end of the twentieth century his work began to be appreciated once more. Ted Hughes collected together and retold twenty-four passages from the "Metamorphoses" in his "Tales from Ovid", published in 1997. In 1998, Mary Zimmerman's stage adaptation "Metamorphoses" premiered at the Lookingglass Theatre, and the following year there was an adaptation of "Tales from Ovid" by the Royal Shakespeare Company. In the early twenty-first century, the poem continues to inspire and be retold through books, films, and plays.
Manuscript tradition.
In spite of the "Metamorphoses"' enduring popularity from its first publication (around the time of Ovid's exile in 8 AD) no manuscript survives from antiquity. From the ninth and tenth centuries there are only fragments of the poem; it is only from the eleventh century onwards that manuscripts, of varying value, have been passed down.
Influential in the course of the poem's manuscript tradition is the seventeenth-century Dutch scholar Nikolaes Heinsius. During the years 1640–52, Heinsius collated more than a hundred manuscripts and was informed of many others through correspondence.
But the poem's immense popularity in antiquity and the Middle Ages belies the struggle for survival it faced in late antiquity. "A dangerously pagan work," the "Metamorphoses" was preserved through the Roman period of Christianization, but was criticized by the voices of Augustine and Jerome, who believed the only metamorphosis really was the transubstantiation. Though the "Metamorphoses" did not suffer the ignominious fate of the "Medea", no ancient scholia on the poem survive (although they did exist in antiquity), and the earliest manuscript is very late, dating from the 11th century.
The poem retained its popularity throughout Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, and is represented by an extremely high number of surviving manuscripts (more than 400); the earliest of these are three fragmentary copies containing portions of Books 1-3, dating to the 9th century.
Collaborative editorial effort has been investigating the various manuscripts of the "Metamorphoses", some forty-five complete texts or substantial fragments, all deriving from a Gallic archetype. The result of several centuries of critical reading is that the poet's meaning is firmly established on the basis of the manuscript tradition or restored by conjecture where the tradition is deficient. There are two modern critical editions: William S. Anderson's, first published in 1977 in the Teubner series, and R. J. Tarrant's, published in 2004 by the Oxford Clarendon Press.
In English translation.
The full appearance of the "Metamorphoses" in English translation (sections had appeared in the works of Chaucer and Gower) coincides with the beginning of printing, and traces a path through the history of publishing. William Caxton produced the first translation of the text on 22 April 1480; set in prose, it is a literal rendering of a French translation known as the "Ovide Moralisé".
In 1567, Arthur Golding published a translation of the poem that would become highly influential, the version read by Shakespeare and Spenser. The next significant translation was by George Sandys, produced from 1621–6, which set the poem in heroic couplets, a metre that would subsequently become dominant in vernacular English epic and in English translations.
In 1717, a translation appeared from Samuel Garth bringing together work "by the most eminent hands": primarily John Dryden, but several stories by Joseph Addison, one by Alexander Pope, and contributions from Tate, Gay, Congreve, and Rowe, as well as those of eleven others including Garth himself. Translation of the "Metamorphoses" after this period was comparatively limited in its achievement; having "no real rivals throughout the nineteenth century", the Garth volume continued to be printed into the 1800s.
Around the later half of the twentieth century a greater number of translations appeared as literary translation underwent a revival. This trend has continued into the early twenty-first century. In 2004, a collection of translations and responses to the poem, entitled "", was produced by numerous contributors in emulation of the process of the Garth volume.
External links.
Latin versions
English translations
Analysis
Audio reading
Images

</doc>
<doc id="83102" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83102" title="Thanatos">
Thanatos

In Greek mythology, Thanatos ( [] "Death", from θνῄσκω "thnēskō" "to die, be dying") was the daemon personification of death. He was a minor figure in Greek mythology, often referred to, but rarely appearing in person.
His name is transliterated in Latin as "Thanatus", but his equivalent in Roman mythology is "Mors" or "Letum"/"Letus", and he is sometimes identified erroneously with Orcus (Orcus himself had a Greek equivalent in the form of Horkos, God of the Oath).
In myth and poetry.
The Greek poet Hesiod established in his "Theogony" that Thánatos is a son of Nyx (Night) and Erebos (Darkness) and twin of Hypnos (Sleep).
Homer also confirmed Hypnos and Thanatos as twin brothers in his epic poem, the "Iliad", where they were charged by Zeus via Apollo with the swift delivery of the slain hero Sarpedon to his homeland of Lycia.
Counted among Thanatos' siblings were other negative personifications such as Geras (Old Age), Oizys (Suffering), Moros (Doom), Apate (Deception), Momus (Blame), Eris (Strife), Nemesis (Retribution) and even the Acherousian/Stygian boatman Charon. Thanatos was loosely associated with the three Moirai (for Hesiod, also daughters of Night), particularly Atropos, who was a goddess of death in her own right. He is also occasionally specified as being exclusive to peaceful death, while the bloodthirsty Keres embodied violent death. His duties as a Guide of the Dead were sometimes superseded by Hermes Psychopompos. Conversely, Thanatos may have originated as a mere aspect of Hermes before later becoming distinct from him.
The god's character is established by Hesiod (one of the first major Ancient Greek writers and a major influence on later poetic and dramatic depictions) in the following passage of the Theogony:
Thanatos was thus regarded as merciless and indiscriminate, hated by - and hateful towards — mortals gods alike. But in myths which feature him, Thanatos could occasionally be outwitted, a feat that the sly King Sisyphus of Korinth twice accomplished. When it came time for Sisyphus to die, Zeus ordered Thanatos to chain Sisyphus up in Tartarus. Sisyphus cheated death by tricking Thanatos into his own shackles, thereby prohibiting the demise of any mortal while Thanatos was so enchained. 
Eventually Ares, the bloodthirsty god of war, grew frustrated with the battles he incited since neither side suffered any casualties. He released Thanatos and handed his captor over to the god. Sisyphus would evade Death a second time by convincing Persephone to allow him to return to his wife stating that she never gave him a proper funeral. This time, Sisyphus was forcefully dragged back to the Underworld by Hermes when Sisyphus refused to accept his death. Sisyphus was sentenced to an eternity of frustration in Tartarus where he rolled a boulder up a hill and it would roll back down when he got close to the top.
A fragment of Alcaeus, a Greek lyric poet of the 6th century BC, refers to this episode:
Sisyphus, son of Aiolos was a more than mortal figure: for mortals Thanatos usually presents an inexorable fate, but he was only once successfully overpowered, by the mythical hero Heracles. Thanatos was consigned to take the soul of Alkestis, who had offered her life in exchange for the continued life of her husband, King Admetos of Pherai. Heracles was an honored guest in the House of Admetos at the time, and he offered to repay the king's hospitality by contending with Death itself for Alkestis' life. When Thanatos ascended from Hades to claim Alkestis, Heracles sprung upon the god and overpowered him, winning the right to have Alkestis revived. Thanatos fled, cheated of his quarry.
Euripides, in "Alcestis":
In art and sculpture.
An Orphic Hymn invoked Thanatos:
"To Thanatos, Fumigation from Manna.<br>
<br>
Hear me, O Death, whose empire unconfin'd<br>
extends to mortal tribes of ev'ry kind.<br>
On thee, the portion of our time depends,<br>
whose absence lengthens life, whose presence ends.<br>
<br>
Thy sleep perpetual bursts the vivid folds<br>
by which the soul, attracting body holds :<br>
common to all, of ev'ry sex and age,<br>
for nought escapes thy all-destructive rage.<br>
<br>
Not youth itself thy clemency can gain, <br>
vigorous and strong, by thee untimely slain. <br>
In thee the end of nature’s works is known,<br>
in thee all judgment is absolved alone. <br>
No suppliant arts thy dreadful rage control, <br>
no vows revoke the purpose of thy soul. <br>
O blessed power, regard my ardent prayer, <br>
and human life to age abundant spare.
In later eras, as the transition from life to death in Elysium became a more attractive option, Thanatos came to be seen as a beautiful Ephebe. He became associated more with a gentle passing than a woeful demise. Many Roman sarcophagi depict him as a winged boy, very much akin to Cupid: "Eros with crossed legs and torch reversed became the commonest of all symbols for Death", observes Arthur Bernard Cook.
Thanatos has also been portrayed as a slumbering infant in the arms of his mother Nyx, or as a youth carrying a butterfly (the ancient Greek word "ψυχή" can mean soul or butterfly, or life, amongst other things) or a wreath of poppies (poppies were associated with Hypnos and Thanatos because of their hypnogogic traits and the eventual death engendered by overexposure to them). 
He is often shown carrying an inverted torch (holding it upside down in his hands), representing a life extinguished. He is usually described as winged and with a sword sheathed at his belt. In Euripides' "Alcestis" (438 BCE), he is depicted dressed in black and carrying a sword. Thanatos was rarely portrayed in art without his twin brother Hypnos.
In psychology and medicine.
According to Sigmund Freud, humans have a life instinct—which he named "Eros"—and a death drive, which is commonly called (though not by Freud himself) "Thanatos". This postulated death drive allegedly compels humans to engage in risky and self-destructive acts that could lead to their own death. Behaviors such as thrill seeking and aggression are viewed as actions which stem from this Thanatos instinct. 
However, some scientists argue that there is little evidence that most people have a specific drive toward self-destruction. According to them, the behaviors Freud studied can be explained by simpler, known processes, such as salience biases (e.g., a person abuses drugs because the promise of immediate pleasure is more compelling than the intellectual knowledge of harm sometime in the future) and risk calculations (e.g., a person drives recklessly or plays dangerous sports because the increases in status and reproductive success outweigh the risk of injury or death). 
Thanatophobia is the fear of things associated with or reminiscent of death and mortality, such as corpses or graveyards. It is related to necrophobia, although the latter term typically refers to a specific fear of dead bodies rather than a fear of death in general.
Thanatology is the academic and scientific study of death among human beings. It investigates the circumstances surrounding a person's death, the grief experienced by the deceased's loved ones, and larger social attitudes towards death such as ritual and memorialization. It is primarily an interdisciplinary study, frequently undertaken by professionals in nursing, psychology, sociology, psychiatry, social work and veterinary science. It also describes bodily changes that accompany death and the after-death period.
Thanatophoric dysplasia, so named because of its lethality at birth, is the most common lethal congenital skeletal dysplasia with an estimated prevalence of one in 6,400 to one in 16,700 births. Its name "Thanatophoros", means "death-bearing" in Greek.
Euthanasia, "good death" in Greek, is the act or practice of ending the life of an individual who would otherwise experience severe, incurable suffering or disability. It typically involves lethal injection or the suspension of extraordinary medical treatment. Doctor Jack Kevorkian named his euthanasia device the Thanatron .

</doc>
<doc id="83103" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83103" title="Jimmy Webb">
Jimmy Webb

Jimmy Layne Webb (born August 15, 1946) is an American songwriter, composer, and singer. He has written numerous platinum-selling songs, including "Up, Up and Away", "By the Time I Get to Phoenix", "Wichita Lineman", "Galveston", "The Worst That Could Happen", "All I Know", and "MacArthur Park". He has had successful collaborations with Glen Campbell, Michael Feinstein, The 5th Dimension, Art Garfunkel, and Richard Harris. In addition, his compositions have been performed by many popular contemporary artists, including America, Johnny Cash, Rosemary Clooney, Joe Cocker, Judy Collins, John Denver, Amy Grant, Isaac Hayes, Thelma Houston, Billy Joel, Tom Jones, Johnny Maestro & the Brooklyn Bridge, Rod McKuen, Linda Ronstadt, R.E.M., Carly Simon, Nina Simone, Frank Sinatra, Barbra Streisand, Donna Summer, The Supremes, James Taylor, The Temptations, Dionne Warwick, and Larry Coryell ("The Real Great Escape").
Webb was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1986 and the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1990. He received the National Academy of Songwriters Lifetime Achievement Award in 1993, the Songwriters Hall of Fame Johnny Mercer Award in 2003, the ASCAP "Voice of Music" Award in 2006, and the Ivor Novello Special International Award in 2012. According to BMI, his song "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" was the third most performed song in the fifty years between 1940 and 1990. Webb is the only artist ever to have received Grammy Awards for music, lyrics, and orchestration.
Early life.
Webb was born on August 15, 1946 in Elk City, Oklahoma. His father, Robert Lee Webb, was a Baptist minister and former member of the United States Marine Corps who presided over rural churches in southwestern Oklahoma and West Texas. With his mother's encouragement, Webb learned piano and organ, and by the age of 12 was playing in the choir of his father's churches, accompanied by his father on guitar and his mother on accordion. Webb grew up in a conservative religious home where his father restricted radio listening to country music and white gospel music.
During the late 1950s, Webb began applying his creativity to the music he was playing at his father's church, frequently improvising and rearranging the hymns. He began to write religious songs at this time, but his musical direction was soon influenced by the new music being played on the radio, including the music of Elvis Presley. In 1961, at the age of 14, he bought his first record, "Turn Around, Look at Me" by Glen Campbell. Webb was drawn to the singer's distinctive voice.
In 1964, Webb and his family moved to Southern California, where he attended San Bernardino Valley College studying music. Following the death of his mother in 1965, his father made plans to return to Oklahoma. Webb decided to stay in California to continue his music studies and to pursue a career as a songwriter in Los Angeles. Webb would later recall his father warning him about his musical aspirations, saying, "This songwriting thing is going to break your heart." Seeing that his son was determined, however, he gave him $40, saying, "It's not much, but it's all I have."
Career.
Early success, 1965–69.
After transcribing other people's music for a small music publisher in Hollywood, Webb was signed to a songwriting contract with Jobete Music, the publishing arm of Motown Records. The first commercial recording of a Jimmy Webb song was "My Christmas Tree" by The Supremes, which appeared on their 1965 "Merry Christmas" album. The following year, Webb met singer and producer Johnny Rivers, who signed him to a publishing deal and recorded his song "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" on his 1966 album "Changes". In 1967, Rivers released "Rewind", an album featuring seven Jimmy Webb songs, including "Do What You Gotta Do" and "Tunesmith", a song also recorded that year by Vikki Carr for her album "It Must Be Him". That same year, Rivers turned to Webb for material for a new group Rivers was producing called The 5th Dimension. Webb contributed five songs to their debut album, "Up, Up and Away", including the title track "Up, Up and Away", which was released as a single in May 1967 and reached the Top Ten. The group's follow-up album, "The Magic Garden", was also released in 1967 and featured eleven additional Jimmy Webb songs, including "The Worst That Could Happen".
In November 1967, Glen Campbell released his version of "By the Time I Get to Phoenix", which reached number 26 and became an instant pop standard. At the 1968 Grammy Awards, held in February 1968, "Up, Up and Away" was named Record of the Year (1967) and Song of the Year (1967). "Up, Up and Away" and "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" received eight Grammy Awards between them. Webb's success as a new songwriter underscored what became the central dilemma in his career. While his sophisticated melodies and orchestrations were embraced by mainstream audiences, his peers were embracing counterculture sounds. Webb was quickly becoming out of sync with his times.
In 1968, "Time" acknowledged Webb's range, proficiency, and "gift for strong, varied rhythms, inventive structures, and rich, sometimes surprising harmonies". That year, the string of successful Jimmy Webb songs continued with The 5th Dimension's "Paper Cup" and "Carpet Man" reaching the Top 40, Glen Campbell's "Wichita Lineman" selling over a million copies, and Johnny Maestro & the Brooklyn Bridge scoring a gold record with "The Worst That Could Happen", a song originally recorded by The 5th Dimension. Webb formed his own production and publishing company that year, Canopy, and scored a hit with its first project, an unlikely album with Irish actor Richard Harris singing an album of all Jimmy Webb songs. One of the songs, "MacArthur Park", was a long, complex piece with multiple movements that was originally rejected by the group The Association. Despite the song's seven minute, twenty-one second length, Richard Harris' version reached #2 on the Hot 100 on 22 June 1968. The Richard Harris album "A Tramp Shining" stayed on the charts for almost a year. Webb and Harris produced a follow-up album, "The Yard Went On Forever", which was also successful. At the 1969 Grammy Awards, Webb accepted awards for "By the Time I Get to Phoenix," "Wichita Lineman," and "MacArthur Park."
In 1969, Glen Campbell continued the streak of Jimmy Webb hits with the gold record "Galveston" and "Where's the Playground, Susie." Webb and Campbell had first met during the production of a General Motors commercial. Webb arrived at the recording session with his Beatle-length hair and approached the conservative singer, who looked up from his guitar and said, "Get a haircut." That same year, two Jimmy Webb songs became hits for the second time with Isaac Hayes' soulful version of "By the Time I Get to Phoenix" and Waylon Jennings' Grammy-winning country version of "MacArthur Park." Webb finished up the year by writing, arranging, and producing Thelma Houston's first album, "Sunshower". As the decade came to a close, so too did Webb's string of hit singles. He began to withdraw from the formulaic process in which he worked and began to experiment with his music. He started work on a semi-autobiographical Broadway musical called "His Own Dark City," which reflected the emotional displacement he felt at the time. He also wrote music for the films "How Sweet It Is!" and "Tell Them Willie Boy Is Here".
Singer-songwriter years, 1970–82.
Webb's career as a singer-songwriter got off to a rough start with the "counterfeit" album "Jim Webb Sings Jim Webb", released by Epic Records in 1968. According to Webb, the album was produced "by a bunch of ruffians from some old demos of mine and tarted up to sound like 'MacArthur Park'". Beginning in 1970, Webb released six original albums of his own songs: "Words and Music" (1970), "" (1971), "Letters" (1972), "Land's End" (1974), "El Mirage" (1977), and "Angel Heart" (1982). Despite the critical reception that followed each of these projects, Webb has never been as successful as a performer as he has been as a songwriter and arranger. Each album was noted for its inventive music and memorable lyrics.
Webb's debut album as a performer, "Words and Music", was released on Reprise Records in late 1970 to critical acclaim. "Rolling Stone" writer Jon Landau called one of the album's cuts, "P.F. Sloan," a "masterpiece could not be improved upon". The album also features the ambitious song trilogy "Music for an Unmade Movie". Webb's 1971 follow up album, "", proved equally appealing to critics. "Rolling Stone" declared the album "another impressive step in the conspiracy to recover his identity from the housewives of America and rightfully install him at the forefront of contemporary composers/performers". The album features the songs "Met Her on a Plane", "All My Love's Laughter", and "Marionette".
Webb's 1972 album "Letters", which features his own rendition of "Galveston", met with similar praise. Music critic Bruce Eder called "Letters" the "most surprising, diverse, and possibly the most satisfying of all of Jimmy Webb's early solo LPs" and "arguably the best of Webb's solo albums". In his review of the album, Peter Reilly of "Stereo Review" wrote, "Jimmy Webb is the most important pop music figure to emerge since Bob Dylan." The album also features the songs "Campo de Encino", an homage to his park-like residence in Encino, California during the 1970s, "When Can Brown Begin", and "Piano".
In 1974, Webb released "Land's End" on Asylum Records. Unlike his previous albums, which tended to be underproduced, Webb was able to achieve a more heavily produced pop/rock sound on "Land's End", which was recorded in England with the help of an all-star session band that included Joni Mitchell, Ringo Starr, and Nigel Olsson. The album contains "a thematic consistency in that most of its songs were tales of romantic discord". While Webb continued to improve as a singer, he "still hadn't found an identity as a solo artist". The album features the songs "Ocean in His Eyes", "Just This One Time", and "Crying in My Sleep".
In 1977, Webb released "El Mirage" on Atlantic Records. Produced, arranged, and conducted by The Beatles' former producer, George Martin, the album was Webb's "most polished effort yet as a performer". William Ruhlmann observed, "These were lush tracks full of tasty playing and warm string charts on which Webb's thin tenor was buoyed by numerous background vocalists, the whole an excellent example of the style known as 'West Coast pop'." The album contains several strong compositions, including "The Highwayman", which would later become a number one country hit for Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, Johnny Cash, and Kris Kristofferson, who named their super group The Highwaymen after the song. Their version of "The Highwayman" won a Grammy Award for Best Country Song. "El Mirage" also features the songs "If You See Me Getting Smaller I'm Leaving", a newly arranged version of "P.F. Sloan", and "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress", which had already been recorded by Joe Cocker, Glen Campbell, and Judy Collins. Despite the positive critical response to the album, "El Mirage" did not succeed in redefining Webb as a performer as he had hoped.
Webb's final solo album from this period, "Angel Heart", was released in 1982 on Lorimar Records. Like its predecessor, the album drew upon the talents of top Los Angeles session musicians to produce a classic West Coast pop sound, enhanced by guest vocal harmonies by Gerry Beckley, Michael McDonald, Graham Nash, Kenny Loggins, Daryl Hall, and Stephen Bishop. Unlike his previous solo albums, however, "Angel Heart" lacked the quality material usually associated with the composer. Apart from "Scissors Cut" and "In Cars", which were previously recorded by Art Garfunkel, the album offered few high points, despite its polished production. A decade would pass before Webb released his next solo album.
Throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s, Webb's songs continued to be recorded by some of the industry's most successful artists. In 1972, Jimmy Webb produced The Supremes's last album featuring Jean Terrell as lead singer, "The Supremes Produced and Arranged by Jimmy Webb". Webb is quoted as saying he had a crush on Mary Wilson when he wrote and produced "I Keep It Hid" featuring her on lead vocals. In 1977, the initial release of Art Garfunkel's "Watermark" album consisted exclusively of songs by Webb. In 1978, Donna Summer's disco version of "MacArthur Park" became a multi-million selling vinyl single that was number one on the American pop music charts for three weeks. In 1980, Thelma Houston recorded "Before There Could Be Me", "Breakwater Cat", "Gone", "Long Lasting Love", and "What Was that Song" on her album "Breakwater Cat". Leah Kunkel recorded "Never Gonna Lose My Dream of Love Again" and "Let's Begin" for her album "I Run with Trouble". The latter was performed live in 1980 by the born-again Bob Dylan. Tanya Tucker recorded "Tennessee Woman" on her album "Dreamlovers".
In 1981, Art Garfunkel recorded "Scissors Cut", "In Cars", and "That's All I've Got to Say" for his album "Scissors Cut", and Arlo Guthrie recorded "Oklahoma Nights" on his album "Power of Love". In 1982, Linda Ronstadt recorded "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress" and "Easy for You to Say" on her album "Get Closer". That same year, Joe Cocker recorded "Just Like Always" on his album "Sheffield Steel", and The Everly Brothers recorded "She Never Smiles Anymore" on their album "Living Legends".
Large-scale projects, 1982–92.
From 1982 to 1992, Webb turned his focus from solo performing to large-scale projects, such as film scores, Broadway musicals, and classical music. In 1982, he produced the soundtrack for the film "The Last Unicorn", an animated children's tale, with the musical group America performing five new Jimmy Webb songs: "The Last Unicorn", "Man's Road", "In the Sea", "Now That I'm a Woman", and "That's All I've Got to Say". The rest of the album contains instrumental music composed, arranged, and conducted by Webb. That same year, he composed the soundtrack to all episodes of the TV series "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers".
The theme music for the 1984-85 TV sitcom "E/R" was written by Webb. Then in 1985, Glen Campbell recorded Webb's "Cowboy Hall of Fame" and "Shattered" for the album "It's Just a Matter of Time". And heavyweights Johnny Cash, Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson, and Kris Kristofferson recorded "Highwayman" on the album "Highwayman". In 1988, Toto recorded "Home of the Brave" on the album "The Seventh One". Kenny Rankin recorded "She Moves, Eyes Follow" for the album "Hiding in Myself". And in 1989, Linda Ronstadt recorded the album "Cry Like a Rainstorm, Howl Like the Wind", which featured four Jimmy Webb songs: "Still Within the Sound of My Voice" (with Webb playing piano), "Adios" (with orchestral arrangement by Webb), "I Keep It Hid" (with Webb playing piano), and "Shattered". In 1990, John Denver recorded "Postcard from Paris" on the album "The Flower That Shattered the Stone". In 1991, Kenny Rogers recorded "They Just Don't Make Em Like You Anymore" on the album "Back Home Again".
In 1986, Webb produced a cantata, "The Animals' Christmas", with Art Garfunkel, Amy Grant, and the London Symphony Orchestra. The cantata tells the Christmas story from the perspective of animals.
In 1987, Webb produced the soundtrack for the film "The Hanoi Hilton". That same year, he reunited with Campbell for the album "Still Within the Sound of My Voice", for which he wrote the title song. They followed this up in 1988 with an album composed almost entirely of Jimmy Webb songs, "Light Years". The album included the title song, as well as "Lightning in a Bottle", "If These Walls Could Speak" (which was recorded by Amy Grant that year) and "Our Movie". Two songs from 1982's "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" also appear on the album. The record also included the songs "Other People's Lives", "Wasn't There A Moment", "I Don't Know How To Love You Anymore", and "Is There Love After You". Several of these songs later ended up on Webb solo albums.
In 1992, Webb completed a musical called "Instant Intimacy", which he developed with the Tennessee Repertory Theatre. The musical contained new songs that he and others would later record, including "What Does a Woman See in a Man", "I Don't Know How to Love You Anymore", and "Is There Love After You". That same year, Webb performed live at the club Cinegrill, performing "What Does a Woman See in a Man" and introducing several additional new songs, including "Sandy Cove" and an old folk hymn, "I Will Arise".
Solo artist, 1993–present.
Since 1993, Jimmy Webb has produced five critically acclaimed solo albums: "Suspending Disbelief" (1993), "Ten Easy Pieces" (1996), "Twilight of the Renegades" (2005), "Just Across the River" (2010), and "Still Within the Sound of My Voice" (2013). He has continued to expand his creative landscape to include musicals, commercial jingles, and film scores.
In 1994, Webb teamed with Nanci Griffith to contribute the song "If These Old Walls Could Speak" to the AIDS benefit album "Red Hot + Country" produced by the Red Hot Organization.
In 1997, Webb co-produced Carly Simon's "Film Noir" album and contributed his vocals, orchestration and piano skills to the project which was filmed for an AMC documentary (which premiered in September 1997). He also co-wrote the song "Film Noir" with Simon. Webb reprised his role as arranger and co-producer on Simon's 2008 album, "This Kind of Love".
In 1998, Webb completed his first book, "Tunesmith: Inside the Art of Songwriting", which was published by Hyperion Books. It was well received by songwriters and performers and became a best-seller. One book reviewer described it as "a companion every serious songwriter should read, and read again, and keep handy for referral".
In the 2000s, Webb has talked more openly about his return to the Christian faith of his upbringing and the role it has played in his music. In addition to his cantata, "The Animals' Christmas", he has always included religious songs in his albums—"Psalm One-Five-O", "Jerusalem", and "I Will Arise" are a few examples—and his lyrics have included biblical verses and allusions. In an October 2007 interview with Nigel Bovey, editor of The Salvation Army newspaper "The War Cry", Webb was quite explicit about his renewed faith.
Webb has stated, "I am a strong believer in God... God is important to me. God is bigger than any one particular denomination. I don't like it when people try to confine Him. I don't put any limits on God." Webb reads the King James Version of the Bible.
In 2007, he released a live album of his show, "Live and at Large" (2007), which was recorded in the United Kingdom. The album included personal stories and anecdotes about Richard Harris, Waylon Jennings, Harry Nilsson, Glen Campbell, Art Garfunkel, Frank Sinatra, and Rosemary Clooney.
Webb appears in the 2008 documentary "The Wrecking Crew" providing thoughtful and descriptive insights into the world of California session musicians in the 1960s.
In June 2010, Webb released "Just Across the River", an album of newly arranged Webb songs that featured guest appearances by Vince Gill, Billy Joel, Willie Nelson, Lucinda Williams, Jackson Browne, Glen Campbell, Michael McDonald, Mark Knopfler, J. D. Souther, and Linda Ronstadt.
In 2011, Webb was unanimously elected Chairman of the Songwriters Hall of Fame, replacing Hal David who retired after ten years in that position.
In May 2012, Webb travelled to London to receive the prestigious Ivor Novello Special International Award, which recognizes non-British writers and composers who have made an extraordinary contribution to the global musical landscape. In September 2012, Fantasy Records released "", a collaborative album by Glen Campbell and Jimmy Webb. The album and its accompanying DVD were filmed, taped, and recorded in December 1988 in the Hamilton, Ontario studios of CHCH-TV as part of the Canadian concert series "In Session".
Webb continues to perform throughout the United States and abroad.
Personal life.
In 1974, Webb married Patsy Sullivan, a model-cover girl and youngest child of screen actor Barry Sullivan. The couple met posing for the cover of "Teen" when she was twelve years old. Sullivan is featured with Webb on the cover of Webb's 1982 solo album "Angel Heart". They have five sons and a daughter together. Two of their sons later formed a rock band, "The Webb Brothers" which later included the couple's third son, James. The Webb Brothers achieved critical success and had a substantial following in Europe and continue to work in the music industry. In 2009, Webb and his sons collaborated on the album "Cottonwood Farm". Sullivan and Webb separated after 22 years of marriage and later divorced.
In 2004, Webb married Laura Savini, who appears nationally on PBS in pledge-drive programs. From 1996 to 2011, Savini was Vice President of Marketing and Communications at WLIW, a PBS station in New York City. The couple first met backstage on New Year's Eve 1999 at Billy Joel's at Madison Square Garden. They met again when Savini interviewed Webb for her local television show and the two soon started dating. They settled on the North Shore of Long Island.

</doc>
<doc id="83105" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83105" title="The 5th Dimension">
The 5th Dimension

The 5th Dimension is an American popular music vocal group, whose repertoire includes pop, R&B, soul, jazz, light opera and Broadway—the melange was coined as "Champagne Soul."
Originally known as The Versatiles and formed in late 1965, according to founder, LaMonte McLemore's currently released autobiographical memoir, the group changed its name to the hipper moniker, The 5th Dimension, by 1966 and became best-known during the late 1960s through early 1970s for popularizing the hits "Up, Up and Away", "Stoned Soul Picnic", "Medley: Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In (The Flesh Failures)", "Wedding Bell Blues", "One Less Bell to Answer", "(Last Night) I Didn't Get to Sleep at All", and "The Magic Garden" LP.
The five original members were Billy Davis, Jr., Florence LaRue, Marilyn McCoo, LaMonte McLemore, and Ron Townson. They have recorded for several different labels over their long careers. Their first work appeared on the Soul City label, which was started by Imperial Records/United Artists Records recording artist Johnny Rivers. The group would later record for Bell/Arista Records, ABC Records, and Motown Records.
Some of the songwriters popularized by The 5th Dimension went on to careers of their own, especially Ashford & Simpson, who wrote "California Soul". The group is also notable for having more success with the songs of Laura Nyro than Nyro did herself, particularly with "Stoned Soul Picnic", "Sweet Blindness", "Wedding Bell Blues", "Blowin' Away", and "Save the Country". The group also covered music by well known songwriters such as the song "One Less Bell to Answer", written by Burt Bacharach and Hal David and the songs and music of Jimmy Webb, who penned their hit "Up, Up and Away", including an entire recording of Webb songs called "The Magic Garden". The 5th Dimension's famed producer, Bones Howe, utilized Bob Alcivar as the singers' vocal arranger, as well as The Wrecking Crew, a renowned group of studio musicians including drummer Hal Blaine, for their recording sessions.
Career.
Formation.
In the early 1960s, LaMonte McLemore and Marilyn McCoo got together with three other friends from Los Angeles, Harry Elston, Lawrence Summers and Fritz Baskett, to form a group called the Hi-Fis (which later became the Vocals). In 1963, they sang at local clubs while taking lessons from a vocal coach. In 1964, they came to the attention of Ray Charles, who took them on tour with him the following year. He produced a single by the group, "Lonesome Mood", a jazz-type song that gained local attention. However, internal disagreements caused Elston to go his way, eventually leading to his forming the Friends of Distinction, along with latter day Hi-Fis member, Floyd Butler.
McLemore sought to form another group and started looking for members to join him and McCoo, who had studied with the respected vocal coach Eddie Beal, appeared in high school and college musical productions, and was known for her way with a torch song. McLemore found Florence LaRue, who had received training as a youngster in singing, dancing, and violin; and who also won the talent portion at the Miss Bronze California contest, which LaMonte was assigned to photograph. (McCoo had won the contest the year prior). About the same time LaRue was approached to join the group, McLemore recruited an old friend of his, Ron Townson, who at age six had started singing in choirs and gospel groups in his hometown of St. Louis. His grandmother fostered his career by arranging for private voice and acting lessons as he grew up. In his teens, he toured with Dorothy Dandridge and Nat King Cole, joined the Wings Over Jordan Gospel Singers for a while, and also played a small part in the film "Porgy and Bess". He demonstrated his skill as a classical artist by placing third in the Metropolitan Opera auditions held in St. Louis. After finishing high school, he worked his way through Lincoln University by conducting the school and church choir. After graduating, he organized his own 25-member gospel choir.
Another of McLemore's friends from St. Louis days, Billy Davis, Jr., started singing in gospel choirs at an early age. He later saved enough money to buy a cocktail lounge in St. Louis, which he used as a base for experimenting with various musical groups. When asked to join McLemore's new group, he said yes, while hoping for a solo contract from the preeminent Motown.
Major hits.
The members began rehearsing as the Versatiles in late 1965 and auditioned for Marc Gordon, who headed Motown's Los Angeles office. Although the group's demo tape was rejected by Motown, Gordon agreed to manage them and brought them to the attention of Johnny Rivers, who had just started his own label, Soul City Records. Their first Soul City single, "I'll Be Lovin' You Forever", was a flop.
In 1965 The Mamas & the Papas' first single, lead member John Phillips' "Go Where You Wanna Go", failed to open the foursome's chart career. At the suggestion of Rivers and their manager Marc Gordon, The 5th Dimension covered the same song virtually note-for-note (except for the last verse's upward modulation), and their early 1967 version climbed into the top 20 on both R&B and pop stations and peaked at #16 on the Hot 100, opening the quintet's chart career.
The budding young songwriter Jimmy Webb supplied the group with their breakthrough hit, "Up, Up and Away", a mid-1967 #7 hit that won five Grammy Awards. The following year, the group scored major hit singles with Laura Nyro's songs "Stoned Soul Picnic" (U.S. #3) and "Sweet Blindness" (U.S. #13). The group received a gold record for their album "Stoned Soul Picnic".
That album also included "California Soul", which peaked at #25 in February 1969. Weeks later the group's success broke wide open, with "Medley: Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In (The Flesh Failures)" from the musical "Hair" topping the Hot 100 for six straight weeks in April and May, and another Nyro song, "Wedding Bell Blues", doing the same for the first three full weeks in November. Their cover of Neil Sedaka's "Workin' On a Groovy Thing" went to #20 in-between. Those four singles kept the group on the Hot 100 all but four weeks in 1969.
Later top 20 hits included 1970's "One Less Bell to Answer" (U.S. #2), 1971's "Love's Lines, Angles and Rhymes" (U.S. #19) and "Never My Love" (U.S. #12), 1972's "(Last Night) I Didn't Get to Sleep at All" (U.S. #8) and "If I Could Reach You" (U.S. #10). The group also had seven other top 40 hits, the last being 1973's "Living Together, Growing Together" (U.S. #32) from the film "Lost Horizon".
TV appearances.
The 5th Dimension performed "Sweet Blindness" on Frank Sinatra's 1968 TV special "Francis Albert Sinatra Does His Thing" and sang "Workin' On a Groovy Thing" and "Wedding Bell Blues" on Woody Allen's "The Woody Allen Special" in 1969. They introduced "Puppet Man" and "One Less Bell To Answer" as guests in the "It Takes a Thief" episode "To Sing a Song of Murder" in 1970; the latter song used as a plot device in which the song's closing notes were to activate a bomb in an assassination attempt of the head of a fictitious country.
The 5th Dimension appeared on "The Ed Sullivan Show" twice in 1969. The group performed and sang a medley consisting of "What the World Needs Now Is Love" and the Beatles' "All You Need Is Love" on February 23, 1969 and performed and sang "Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In" on May 18, 1969, the day after the medley fell from the Hot 100 summit. That same year the group appeared on the British show "This Is Tom Jones", singing "Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In" and "Got My Mojo Workin' ".
"The 5th Dimension: An Odyssey in the Cosmic Universe of Peter Max", a television special, aired on CBS on May 21, 1970.
During the last season of "The Ed Sullivan Show", Sullivan dedicated the entire February 21, 1971 episode to the fifth anniversary of The 5th Dimension. The group opened the show with "Love's Lines, Angles and Rhymes" and later joined Connie Stevens for "Puppet Man". The group came back for the last 15 minutes of the show and sang their hits "Up, Up and Away", "One Less Bell to Answer", "Stoned Soul Picnic", "Wedding Bell Blues", and finished up with "Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In". This appearance would be the group's last on Sullivan.
"The 5th Dimension Traveling Sunshine Show", a television special, aired on August 18, 1971.
The 5th Dimension also made memorable appearances on "Soul Train", "American Bandstand", "The Flip Wilson Show", "The Mike Douglas Show", and "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson".
Regrouping.
In 1975, McCoo and Davis, who had married on 26 July 1969, left the group to do both collective and individual projects. They went on to have success as a duo with "Your Love" and the chart topper "You Don't Have to Be a Star (To Be in My Show)" which won them their seventh Grammy award. McCoo also served a lengthy '80's stint as the host of the TV show "Solid Gold". The remaining trio carried on with new members, and nearly had a hit in 1976 with the LaRue-sung "Love Hangover"; however, Motown issued Diana Ross' original version shortly after the 5th Dimension's hit the charts, and hers soared to the top of the charts. The group signed with Motown not long after, releasing two albums in 1978. R&B singer Lou Courtney was in the group briefly in 1978 and 1979, Joyce Wright joined in 1979, and Phyllis Battle joined in 1988.
Reunion and departure.
The original quintet reunited in 1990 and 1991 for a tour. Townson briefly left the group to try a solo career, but soon returned, as the group eventually resigned itself to the nostalgia circuit. In 1995, the quintet of LaRue, Townson, McLemore, Battle, and Greg Walker recorded a new album, "In the House", for Click Records. In 1998, Willie Williams replaced Townson, who died in 2001 due to diabetes-related kidney failure. Battle departed in 2002, to be replaced by Van Jewell. McLemore left from the group in March 2006.
Today.
, the group is actively touring as "The 5th Dimension featuring Florence LaRue", led by LaRue, with Willie Williams, Leonard Tucker, Patrice Morris, and Floyd Smith.
Celebrating 45 years of marriage, McCoo and Davis continue to tour separately from the 5th Dimension as their own act: "Marilyn McCoo and Billy Davis, Jr." In October 2011, McCoo and Davis were featured on the Cliff Richard album "Soulicious", also appearing live on stage in the tour of the same name, reprising several of their hits as well as dueting with Richard. In 2013, McCoo and Davis released their own double-CD project: "Marilyn McCoo and Billy Davis, Jr. Live".
On February 14, 2015, McLemore released his autobiographical memoir, "From Hobo Flats to The 5th Dimension: A Life Fulfilled in Baseball, Photography and Music".
Honors.
The group was inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2002.
The group has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, inducted August 9, 1991, and the St. Louis Walk of Fame, inducted on March 18, 2010.
Membership.
McCoo and Davis left the group in November 1975. Since then, other members have included:
Discography.
Singles.
US charts are from "Billboard". Canadian charts are taken from the weekly surveys of CHUM in Toronto.

</doc>
<doc id="83106" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83106" title="Nick Carter">
Nick Carter

Nick or Nicholas Carter may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83108" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83108" title="Aaron Carter">
Aaron Carter

Aaron Charles Carter (born December 7, 1987) is an American singer. He came to fame as a pop and hip hop singer in the late 1990s, establishing himself as a star among pre-teen and teenage audiences during the early 2000s with his four studio albums.
Born in Tampa, Florida, Carter began performing at age seven and released his self-titled debut album in 1997. His second album "Aaron's Party (Come Get It)" (2000) sold 3 million copies in the United States, and Carter began making guest appearances on Nickelodeon and touring with the Backstreet Boys shortly after the record's release. Carter's next album, "Oh Aaron", also went platinum, and the musician released his most recent studio album, "Another Earthquake", in 2002, followed by his 2003 "Most Requested Hits" collection. He has since appeared on "Dancing With the Stars", the Broadway play "The Fantasticks", and made several one-off performances. In 2014, he announced that he would begin releasing new music and began by releasing a single featuring rapper Pat SoLo, "Ooh Wee", which first became available as a free download with purchase on his web store, and is reportedly working on a new studio album titled "LØVË", set to be released in late 2016.
Early and personal life.
Aaron Charles Carter was born on December 7, 1987, at the Tampa General Hospital in Tampa, Florida, where his parents, Jane Elizabeth (née Spaulding) and Robert Gene Carter, ran the Garden Villa Retirement Home. The family was originally from New York, where his older brother Nick, of the boy band Backstreet Boys, was born. In addition to his brother Nick, he also has three sisters: twin sister Angel (a model), B.J. and Leslie (1986–2012). Carter is named after his maternal grandfather, Douglas "Charles" Spaulding, and paternal grandfather, Aaron Charles Carter. Carter attended the Frank D. Miles Elementary School and the Ruskin School in Florida.
On February 21, 2008, Carter was arrested in Kimble County, Texas, when he was pulled over for speeding, and authorities found less than two ounces of marijuana in his car.
Music career.
1997–99: Music beginnings and self-titled debut album.
Carter began his performing career at the age of seven, as the lead singer of Dead End, a local band formed after the members met at a rock school that they attended in Tampa. He left the band after two years because they were interested in alternative rock while Carter was interested in pop.
Carter made his first solo appearance, singing a cover of The Jets' "Crush on You", when opening for the Backstreet Boys in Berlin in March 1997. The performance was followed by a record contract, and in the fall of 1997, he released his first single, "Crush on You". His first full-length album was released on December 1, 1997. The eponymous debut album achieved gold status in Norway, Spain, Denmark, Canada, and Germany, and was released in the United States on June 16, 1998.
2000–01: "Aaron's Party (Come Get It)", acting debut, and "Oh Aaron".
Carter's next album, "Aaron's Party (Come Get It)" was released in the United States on September 26, 2000 under the Jive label. The album sold more than 3 million copies in the United States and was certified 3x platinum by RIAA. The album included the hit singles, "I Want Candy", "Aaron's Party (Come Get It)", "That's How I Beat Shaq" and "Bounce", which songs received airplay on Disney and Nickelodeon. He also made several guest appearances on Nickelodeon and performed as opening act in several concerts for Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys. In December of that year the album went platinum and he began dating teen actress Hilary Duff.
In March 2001, he made his acting debut, guest starring on an episode of the Disney Channel series "Lizzie McGuire". That same month, he and fellow teen star Samantha Mumba performed a concert in MGM studios live on Disney Channel, titled "Aaron Carter and Samantha Mumba in Concert". Aaron's part of the concert was released to DVD that same month as . In April 2001, he made his Broadway debut, playing JoJo the Who in "Seussical the Musical" by Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty.
At the age of 13, Carter recorded the album "Oh Aaron", which was released on August 7, 2001 and featured his first duet recording with his brother, Nick, and a duet with the new group at the time, No Secrets. Play Along Toys also created an Aaron Carter action figure in conjunction with the album's release. Oh Aaron also went platinum that same year and a live concert at Baton Rouge, Louisiana, was released to DVD as .
2002–08: "Another Earthquake" and "Saturday Night".
Carter's next album, "Another Earthquake", was released on September 3, 2002, during the "Rock, Rap, and Retro" tour. The album featured the patriotic-themed "America A.O." and the ballad "Do You Remember". He guest starred on three episodes of "All That" and sang the theme song to the PBS animated series "Liberty's Kids", titled "Through My Own Eyes."
During that time, Carter's parents filed a lawsuit against his former manager, Lou Pearlman (now in federal prison for major fraud), in 2002 alleging failure to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars in royalties on Carter's 1998 album, which was released through Pearlman's label and production company, Trans Continental. On March 13, 2003, Pearlman was declared in contempt of court for ignoring a court order to produce documents relating to royalty payments. He had also dated Lindsay Lohan along with his girlfriend Hilary Duff at the same time (leading to a feud between the two), but he broke up with Lohan in April 2003, and resumed dating Duff. Later, that same year, he reportedly cheated on her and Duff ended their on-and-off relationship after two years.
Carter's "Most Requested Hits", a collection including tracks from his last three albums as well as a new single, "One Better", was released on November 3, 2003.
"Saturday Night", which was released on March 22, 2005 and was promoted by Carter during his summer 2005 "Remix Tour". The song was released by Trans Continental label, with Lou Pearlman as executive producer. The single was also featured in the soundtrack of the film "Popstar", in which Carter starred. The direct-to-video film was based heavily on his own life as a performer. A real-life motocross racer, Carter also appeared in 2005's "Supercross". On March 21, 2006, Trans Continental filed a lawsuit against Carter within the Los Angeles Superior Court, citing that Carter allegedly reneged on a recording deal. Carter had signed the contract on December 7, 2004, when he was 17 and underage. His attorney however stated that Carter had the right to "cancel or void various agreements" that were signed when he was a minor.
Carter and his siblings starred in a reality show, "House of Carters", which ran in October–November 2006 on E!. The series features all five Carter siblings reuniting to live in the same house. On September 18, 2006, it was reported that Carter was engaged to former beauty queen and Playboy model Kari Ann Peniche. "US Weekly" later reported that Carter had broken off his engagement to Peniche, saying he was impulsive in proposing to her.
2008–2013: "Dancing with the Stars" and touring.
In 2009, Carter joined season 9 of "Dancing with the Stars". On November 10, he was eliminated from the show along with his partner Karina Smirnoff. They finished in fifth place.
During this time he also released some music online, including the single "Dance with Me" featuring Flo Rida in an attempt to kickstart his music career again. On August 22, 2010, Carter performed in Lake Ronkonkoma, NY at a benefit concert for Audrianna Bartol, a 3-year-old stricken with Stage 4 neuroblastoma cancer.
On January 23, 2011, Carter's manager Johnny Wright announced that Carter had entered a treatment facility "to heal some emotional and spiritual issues he was dealing with." After entering the facility, Carter's first message to his fans was, "The main thing in life is not to be afraid of being human." On February 10, 2011, it was announced that Carter had successfully completed a month of rehab at the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, California. Carter was scheduled to perform a second benefit concert for Audrianna Bartol on February 5, 2011 in Lake Ronkonkoma, NY and a benefit for the activist organization, "Four Years. Go", was originally scheduled for February 24, 2011 in Manville, New Jersey. The Manville show was rescheduled to take place on March 24, 2011. On September 2, 2011, Carter performed a show at the Eagle Ridge Mall in Lake Wales, Florida.
On November 7, 2011, Carter began starring in the Off-Broadway production of the world's longest running musical, The Fantasticks, at the Snapple Theater Center in New York City. Carter has been cast in the role of Matt, the play's central character.
In January 2012, Carter was one of eight celebrities participating in the Food Network reality series "". He was eliminated in the first episode.
Throughout 2012, Carter made several one-off performances. On January 12, 2012, Carter performed a concert at Showcase Live in Foxborough, Massachusetts, and on January 19, 2012, he performed another concert at the Gramercy Theater in New York City. On May 11, 2012, he performed an acoustic show at the Mohegan Sun casino in Uncasville, Connecticut. Carter hosted a Ryan Cabrera show on May 30, 2012 in Flemington, New Jersey, and performed at Mixtape Festival on August 17, 2012. In 2013, Carter kicked off his first tour in eight years, the After Party Tour. The tour ran from February to December 2013 and included over 150 shows in the United States and Canada.
2014-present: "LØVË".
In June 2014, Carter went on an 11-city Canadian tour during which he performed brand new songs from his upcoming album for the first time. Carter also announced that he would be embarking on a worldwide tour entitled the Wonderful World Tour, named for a song titled "Wonderful World" off of his upcoming album. The tour included 50 dates and ran from September 2014 until January 2015. On July 18, 2014, Carter appeared on "Good Day LA", where he performed his new single, "Ooh Wee".
He released "Ooh Wee" as a single featuring Pat SoLo, which first became available as a free download with purchase of merchandise on his web store.
On November 24, 2015, Carter previewed a sample of a single titled "Fool's Gold" via Billboard, which is set to be on his upcoming album, "LØVË", set for release in late 2016. The album is written by Carter, Jon Asher, Melanie Fontana, Taylor (Lakestreet Louie) Helgeson and Michel Schulzthe album is set to be executive produced and independently released by Carter on his new Record Label venture, Rakkaus Records. "Fool's Gold" was released on April 1, 2016 as the first single from the album.
Bankruptcy.
On November 22, 2013, Carter filed a bankruptcy petition to shed more than $3.5 million in debt, mostly taxes owed from the money made at the height of his popularity. "This is not a negative thing," Carter publicist Steve Honig told CNN. "It's actually very positive. It's him doing what he needs to do to move forward." The petition states that Carter's biggest creditor is the U.S. government; "he owes the Internal Revenue Service $1.3 million in back taxes from his income in 2003, when Carter was just 16."
In 2014, Carter settled all of his tax debt.

</doc>
<doc id="83109" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83109" title="Sail-plan">
Sail-plan

A sail-plan is a set of drawings, usually prepared by a naval architect. It shows the various combinations of sail proposed for a sailing ship.
The combinations shown in a sail-plan almost always include three configurations:
In all sail plans, the architect attempts to balance the force of the sails against the drag of the underwater keel in such a way that the vessel naturally points into the wind. In this way, if control is lost, the vessel will avoid broaching (turning edge-to-the wind), and being beaten by breaking waves. Broaching always causes uncomfortable motion, and in a storm, the breaking waves can destroy a lightly built boat. The architect also tries to balance the wind force on each sail plan against a range of loads and ballast. The calculation assures that the sail will not knock the vessel sideways with its mast in the water, capsizing and perhaps sinking it.
Terminology.
Types of sail.
Each form of rig requires its own type of sails. Among them are:
Order.
The standard terminology assumes three masts, from front to back, the fore-mast, main-mast and mizzen-mast. On ships with fewer than three masts, the tallest is the main-mast. Ships with more masts number them.
From bottom to top, the sails of each mast are named by the mast and position on the mast, e.g. for the mainmast, from lowest to highest: main course, main topsail, main topgallant ("t'gallant"), main royal, main skysail, and main moonraker. Since the early nineteenth century, the topsails and topgallants are often split into a lower and an upper sail to allow them to be more easily handled. This makes the mast appear to have more "sails" than it officially has.
On many warships, sails above the fighting top (a platform just above the lowest sail) were mounted on separate masts ("topmasts" or "topgallant masts") held in wooden sockets called "tabernacles". These masts and their stays could be rigged or struck as the weather and tactical situation demanded.
In light breezes, the working square sails would be supplemented by "studding sails" ("stuns'l") out on the ends of the yardarms. These were called as a regular sail, with the addition of "studding". For example, the "main top studding sail".
The staysails between the masts are named from the sail immediately below the highest attachment point of the stay holding up the staysail. Thus, the mizzen topgallant staysail can be found dangling from the stay leading from above the mizzen (third) mast's topgallant sail to some place (usually two sails down) on the second (main) mast.
The jibs, staysails between the first mast and the "bowsprit" were named (from inner to outer most) fore topmast staysail (or foretop stay), inner jib, outer jib and flying jib. All of the jibs' stays meet the foremast just above the fore topgallant. Unusually, a fore royal staysail may also be set.
Material.
Sails were classically made of hemp or cotton. They are now made from polyesters (Dacron and PET film), sometimes reinforced with crystalline hydrocarbons (Kevlar and Spectra). Some large, lightweight sails are made of polyamides (nylon).
Lines.
In the age of sail, lines were made of manila, cotton, hemp, or jute. Modern lines are made of polyester (Dacron), polyamides (nylon), and sometimes crystallized hydrocarbons (Kevlar and Spectra). Standing rigging may include wire rope made of stainless or galvanized steel. Other older, or less common materials include papyrus in ancient Egypt and coir.
Rigging.
Sprit and stays.
The stays on a ship roughly form hoops of tension holding the masts up against the wind. Many ships have been "tuned" by tightening the rigging in one area, and loosening it in others. The tuning can create most of the stress on the stays in some ships.
Types of ships.
Sailboat types may be distinguished by:
Proa.
Constructible using stone age tools, variations on the crab claw sail rig on various sized open ocean canoes carried the Pacific island navigators on regular long range trips. Both ends are alike, and the boat is sailed in either direction, but it has a high windward side and a lower leeward side supported by an outrigger.
Sunfish.
A variation on the proa with a single unstayed mast and a single sail, which uses upper and lower spars like a crab claw sail but which pivots around the mast like a lateen. The usage of two straight spars allows for the sails to be cut straight without any camber factored in, making the sails considerably simpler to manufacture.
Bragana or felucca.
A classic in the Mediterranean or Indian Ocean. Three lateen sails in a row.
Catboat.
A sailboat with a single mast and single sail, usually gaff-rigged. This is the easiest sail-plan to sail, and is used on the smallest and simplest boats. The catboat is a classic fishing boat. A popular movement among home-built boats uses this simple rig to make "folk-boats". One of the advantages of this type is that it can be rigged with no boom to hit one's head or knock one into the water. However, the gaff requires two halyards and often two topping lifts. The weight of the gaff spar high in the rigging can be undesirable. The gaff's "fork" (jaws) is held on by a rope threaded through beads called "truck"s (US) or "parrel beads" (UK). The gaff must slide down the mast, and therefore prevents any stays from bracing the mast. This usually makes the rig even heavier, requiring yet more ballast.
Sloop.
A Bermuda or gaff mainsail lifted by a single mast with a single jib bent onto the forestay, held taut with a backstay. The mainsail is usually managed with a spar on the underside called a "boom". One of the best-performing rigs per square foot of sail area and is fast for up-wind passages. This rig is the most popular for recreational boating because of its potential for high performance. On small boats, it can be a simple rig. On larger sloops, the large sails have high loads, and one must manage them with winches or multiple purchase block-and-tackle devices.
Gunter.
A rig designed for smaller boats where the mast is often taken down. It consists of a relatively short mast (usually slightly shorter than the boat so that it can be stowed inside) and a long gaff (often only slightly shorter than the mast). However, rather than the usual trapezoidal shape of a gaff sail, it is triangular, like a Bermuda rig. This allows the gaff, when hoisted, to pivot upwards until it is vertical, effectively forming an extension to the mast. Thus a decent-sized sailing rig can be added to the boat while still allowing all the equipment to be stowed completely inside it. The popular Mirror class of dinghy is gunter rigged for this reason.
Lugger.
Similar to a gaff rig but a lugger's gaff does not attach to the mast. Instead, it is allowed to move forward and aft of the mast and is managed through a series of lines that attach to the gaff and to the corners of the sail. May or may not have a boom along its foot. In Scotland, when constructed with a main "dipping" lug sail and a mizzen "standing" lug sail, such vessels were known as fifies, sailing fifies, or herring drifters, and were often used for herring fishing.
Cutter.
A small single-masted ship with fore-and-aft rigging on its only mast and with two or more headsails; frequently a bowsprit as well. Better than a sloop for light winds, it is also easier to manage, due to the sail area being split up between smaller sails which require less force to trim as compared to the larger single jib of the sloop. The mast is located at about 50% of boat length.
Yawl.
A small ship, fore-and-aft rigged on its two masts, with its mainmast much taller than its mizzen and with or without headsails. The mizzen mast is located aft of the rudderpost, sometimes directly on the transom, and is intended to help provide helm balance.
Ketch.
A small ship with two masts, both fore-and-aft rigged, with the mizzen located well forward of the rudderpost and of only slightly smaller size than the mainmast (if the height of the masts were reversed—the taller in the back and the shorter in the front—it would be considered a schooner). Historically the mainmast was square rigged instead of fore-and-aft, but in modern usage only the latter is called a ketch. The purpose of the mizzen sail in a ketch rig, unlike the mizzen on a yawl rig, is to provide drive to the hull. A ketch rig allows for shorter sails than a sloop with the same sail area, resulting in a lower center of sail and less overturning moment. The shorter masts therefore reduce the amount of ballast and stress on the rigging needed to keep the boat upright. Generally the rig is safer and less prone to broaching or capsize than a comparable sloop, and has more flexibility in sail-plan when reducing sail under strong crosswind conditions—the mainsail can be brought down entirely (not requiring reefing) and the remaining rig will be both balanced on the helm and capable of driving the boat. The ketch is a classic small cargo boat.
Junk.
The standard Chinese design: The sails are made flat with bamboo inserts (battens), permitting them to sail well on any point of sail. Easy to sail, and reasonably fast. The nature of the rig places no extreme loads anywhere on the sail or rigging, thus can be built using light-weight, less expensive materials. Junks also customarily had internal water-tight rooms. They remained water-tight because they had no door to other water-tight compartments. Movement was over the wall by ladders or companionways. Usually they were constructed of teak or mahogany. 
Schooner.
A fore-and-aft rig having at least two masts, with a foremast that is usually smaller than the other masts. Schooners have traditionally been gaff-rigged and in small craft are generally two-masted, however many have been built with marconi rigs (and even junk rigs) rather than gaffs and in the golden age of sail, vessels were built with as many as seven masts. One of the easiest types to sail, but performs poorly to windward without gaff topsails. The extra sails and ease of the gaff sails make the rig easier to operate, though not necessarily faster, than a sloop on all points of sail other than up-wind. Schooners were more popular than sloops prior to the upsurge in recreational boating. The better performance of the sloop upwind was outweighed for most sailors by the better performance of the schooner at all other, more comfortable, points of sail. Advances in design and equipment over the last hundred years have diminished the advantages of the schooner rig. Many schooners sailing today are either reproductions or replicas of famous schooners of old.
Topsail Schooner.
A schooner having one or more square-rigged sails on its foremast, but still having gaff-rigged main sails on all masts.
Two-topsail Schooner or Jackass brig.
A schooner having one or more square-rigged sails on its foremast and mainmast, but still having gaff-rigged main sails on all masts.
Brig.
Two masts, both square-rigged. The mainmast has a square mainsail and a spanker sail behind it. They are considered very fast and maneuverable, and can reach speeds of up to 11 knots.
Brigantine (UK), Brig (US).
Two masts: a square-rigged foremast and a mainmast with a gaff mainsail and square topsails, with staysails between the masts. For UK terminology it is the gaff-rigged mainsail on a brigantine which distinguishes it from the brig, which is principally square rigged on both masts. In American terminology, this sail plan is often considered still a brig, and the term "brigantine" usually refers to a vessel with the foremast square-rigged and the mainmast fore-and-aft rigged, without any square sails (a hermaphrodite brig).
Hermaphrodite Brig or Schooner Brig.
Two masts, square-rigged on the foremast and fore-and-aft rigged on the mainmast.
Snow.
Similar to the brig in that it has two masts, both of them square-rigged. Where it differs from the brig is that instead of being attached the main-mast, the spanker sail is attached to a small trysail mast just abaft (behind) the main-mast.
Barque.
Three masts or more, square rigged on all except the aftmost mast. Usually three or four masted but five masted barques have been built. Lower-speed, especially downwind, but requiring fewer sailors than a ship. This is a classic slow-cargo ship.
Barquentine or Schooner Barque.
A three masted vessel, square rigged on the foremast and fore-and-aft rigged on the main and mizzen masts. Some sailors who have sailed on them say it is a poor-handling compromise between a barque and a ship, though having more speed than a barque or schooner.
Polacre.
A three master with a narrow hull; carrying a square-rigged foremast, followed by two lateen sails. The same vessel, if she substituted her square-rigged mast with another lateen rigged one, would be called a xebec.
Fully Rigged Ship.
Three or more masts, square rigged on all, usually with stay-sails between masts. The classic "ship rig" originally had exactly three masts, but four and five masted ships were also built. Occasionally the mizzen mast would have a fore-and-aft sail as its course sail, but in order to qualify as a "fully rigged ship" the vessel would need to have a square-rigged top sail mounted above this (thus distinguishing the fully rigged ship from, say, a barque—see above). The classic sailing warship—the ship of the line—was "full rigged" in this way, because of high performance on all points of wind. In particular, studding sails or topping sails could be easily added for light airs or high speeds. Square rigs have twice the sail area per mast height compared to triangular sails, and when tuned, more exactly approximate a multiple airfoil, and therefore apply larger forces to the hull. Windage (drag) is more than triangular rigs, which have smaller tip vortices. Therefore, historic ships could not point as far upwind as high performance sloops. However, contemporary marconi rigs (sloops, etc.) were limited in size by the strength of available materials, especially their sails and the running rigging to set them. Ships were not so limited, because their sails were smaller relative to the hull, distributing forces more evenly, over more masts. Therefore, due to their much larger, longer waterline length, ships had much faster hull speeds, and could run down or away from any contemporary sloop or other marconi rig, even if it pointed more upwind. Schooners have a heavier rig and require more ballast than ships, which increases the wetted area and hull friction of a large schooner compared to a ship of the same size. The result is that a ship can run down or away from a schooner of the same hull length. Ships were larger than brigs and brigantines, and faster than barques or barquentines, but required more sailors.
Sail-plan measurements.
Every sail-plan has maximum dimensions. These maxima are for the largest sail possible and they are defined by a letter abbreviation.

</doc>
<doc id="83110" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83110" title="Tiger Beat">
Tiger Beat

Tiger Beat is an American fan magazine marketed primarily to adolescent girls. It is currently published by TigerBeat Media, LLC, of New York, New York, which also produces its sister publication, "BOP".
History and profile.
Founded in September 1965 by Charles "Chuck" Laufer and his brother, Ira, "Tiger Beat" has as its forte teen idol gossip, movies, music and fashion. It is known for its covers with 'cut and paste' collaged photos of teen idols. Its publisher, originally named The Laufer Co., also founded and published the teen magazine "FaVE" (now defunct).
Lloyd Thaxton's face appeared at the top of the newly launched "Tiger Beat" magazine (then known as "Lloyd Thaxton's Tiger Beat") for which he did a column. Thaxton was a co-founder of "Tiger Beat" magazine.
"Tiger Beat" was sold to Primedia late in 1998 by former publisher Sterling/MacFadden. It was purchased in 2003 by Scott Laufer, the son of Chuck Laufer. The magazine was sold to TigerBeat Media, LLC, founded by Mark Patricof, in June 2015.

</doc>
<doc id="83111" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83111" title="Fibber McGee and Molly">
Fibber McGee and Molly

Fibber McGee and Molly was an American radio comedy series that maintained its popularity over decades. It premiered on NBC in 1935 and continued until 1959, long after radio had ceased to be the dominant form of entertainment in American popular culture.
Husband and wife in real life.
The stars of the program were real-life husband and wife team James "Jim" Jordan (16 November 1896 – 1 April 1988) and Marian Driscoll (15 April 1898 – 7 April 1961), who were natives of Peoria, Illinois.
Jordan was the seventh of eight children born to James Edward Jordan and Mary (née Tighe) Jordan, while Driscoll was the twelfth out of thirteen children born to Daniel P. and Anna (née Carroll) Driscoll. The son of a farmer, Jim wanted to be a singer; Marian, the daughter of a coal miner, wanted to be a music teacher. Both attended the same Catholic church, where they met at choir practice. Marian's parents had attempted to discourage her professional singing and acting aspirations. When she started seeing young Jim Jordan, the Driscolls were far from approving of Jim and his ideas. Jim's voice teacher gave him a recommendation for work as a professional in Chicago, and he followed it. He was able to have steady work but soon tired of the life on the road. In less than a year, Jim came back to Peoria and went to work for the Post Office. His profession was now acceptable to Marian's parents, and they stopped objecting to the couple's marriage plans. The pair were married in Peoria on August 31, 1918.
Five days after the wedding, Jim received his draft notice. He was sent to France and became part of a military touring group that entertained the armed forces after World War I. When Jim came home from France, he and Marian decided to try their luck with a vaudeville act. They had two children, Kathryn Therese Jordan (1920–2007) and James Carroll Jordan (1923–1998), both born in Peoria. Marian returned home for the birth of Kathryn but went back to performing with Jim, leaving her daughter with Jim's parents. After Jim Jr. was born in 1923, Marian stayed with the children for a time, while Jim performed as a solo act. Marian and the children joined him on the road for a short time, but the couple had to admit defeat when they found themselves in Lincoln, Illinois in 1923 with two small children and no funds. The couple's parents had to wire them money for their return to Peoria. Jim went to work at a local department store but still felt the attraction of being in show business. He and Marian went back into vaudeville.
While staying with Jim's brother in Chicago in 1924, the family was listening to the radio; Jim said that he and Marian could do better than the musical act currently on the air. Jim's brother bet him $10 that they could not. To win the bet, Jim and Marian went to WIBO, where they were immediately put on the air. At the end of the performance, the station offered the couple a contract for a weekly show, which paid $10 per week. The sponsor of the show was Oh Henry! candy, and they appeared for six months on "The Oh Henry! Twins" program, switching to radio station WENR by 1927.
When it appeared to the couple that they were financially successful, they built a home in Chicago, which was a replica of their rented home, complete to building it on the lot next door. For their 1939 move to the West Coast, the Jordans selected an inconspicuous home in Encino. Some of Jim Jordan's investments included the bottling company for Hires Root Beer in Kansas City.
From vaudeville to "Smackout".
"Fibber McGee and Molly" originated when the small-time husband-and-wife vaudevillians began their third year as Chicago-area radio performers. Two of the shows they did for station WENR beginning in 1927, both written by Harry Lawrence, bore traces of what was to come and rank as one of the earliest forms of situation comedy. In their "Luke and Mirandy" farm-report program, Jim played a farmer who was given to tall tales and face-saving lies for comic effect. In a weekly comedy, "The Smith Family", Marian's character was an Irish wife of an American police officer. These characterizations, plus the Jordans' change from being singers/musicians to comic actors, pointed toward their future; it was here where Marian developed and perfected the radio character "Teeny". It was also at WENR where the Jordans met Donald Quinn, a cartoonist who was then working in radio, and the couple hired him as their writer in 1931. They regarded Quinn's contribution as important and included him as a full partner; the salary for "Smackout" and "Fibber McGee and Molly" was split between the Jordans and Quinn.
While working on the WENR farm report, Jim Jordan heard a true story about a shopkeeper from Missouri whose store was brimming with stock, yet he claimed to be "smack out" of whatever a customer would ask him for. The story reached the halls of nearby Columbia College, and the students began visiting the store, which they called "Smackout", to hear the owner's incredible stories.
For station WMAQ in Chicago, beginning in April 1931, the trio created "Smackout", a 15-minute daily program that centered on a general store and its proprietor, Luke Grey (Jim Jordan), a storekeeper with a penchant for tall tales and a perpetual dearth of whatever his customers wanted: He always seemed "smack out of it". Marian Jordan portrayed both a lady named Marian and a little girl named Teeny, as well as accompanying the program on piano. During the show's run, Marian Jordan voiced a total of 69 different characters. "Smackout" was picked up by NBC in April 1933 and broadcast nationally until August 1935.
One of the S. C. Johnson company's owners, Henrietta Johnson Lewis, recommended that her husband, John, Johnson Wax's advertising manager, try the show out on a national network. The terms of the agreement between S. C. Johnson and the Jordans awarded the company ownership of the names "Fibber McGee" and "Molly".
From "Smackout" to Wistful Vista.
If "Smackout" proved the Jordan-Quinn union's viability, their next creation proved their most enduring. Amplifying Luke Grey's tall talesmanship to Midwestern braggadocio, Quinn developed "Fibber McGee and Molly" with Jim as the foible-prone Fibber and Marian playing his patient, common sense, honey-natured wife. The show premiered on NBC April 16, 1935, and though it took three seasons to become an irrevocable hit, it became the country's top-rated radio series. In 1935, Jim Jordan won the Burlington Liars' Club championship with a story about catching an elusive rat.
Existing in a kind of Neverland where money never came in, schemes never stayed out for very long, yet no one living or visiting went wanting, 79 Wistful Vista (the McGees' address from show #20, August 1935 onward) became the home Depression-exhausted Americans visited to remind themselves that they were not the only ones finding cheer in the middle of struggle and doing their best not to make it overt. The McGees won their house in a raffle from Mr. Hagglemeyer's Wistful Vista Development Company, with lottery ticket #131,313, happened upon by chance while on a pleasure drive in their car. With blowhard McGee wavering between mundane tasks and hare-brained schemes (like digging an oil well in the back yard), antagonizing as many people as possible, and patient Molly indulging his foibles and providing loving support, not to mention a tireless parade of neighbors and friends in and out of the quiet home, "Fibber McGee and Molly" built its audience steadily, but once it found the full volume of that audience in 1940, they rarely let go of it.
Marian Jordan took a protracted absence from the show from November 1937 to April 1939 to deal with a lifelong battle with alcoholism, although this was attributed to "fatigue" in public statements at the time. The show was retitled Fibber McGee and Company during this interregnum, with scripts cleverly working around Molly's absence (Fibber making a speech at a convention, etc.). Comedian ZaSu Pitts appeared on the "Fibber McGee and Company" show, as did singer Donald Novis.
While his wife was ill, Jim Jordan had been closing his radio shows by saying "Goodnight, Molly." In early 1938, the Federal Communications Commission ordered him to stop, claiming it violated a rule about using public airwaves for personal communications. After a few weeks' deliberation, the Commission found that no regulations had been broken, because Molly was the name of Marian Jordan's radio character. Jordan was then able to resume his "Goodnight, Molly" signoff. In January 1939, the show moved from NBC Chicago to the new NBC West Coast Radio City in Hollywood.
Recurring characters.
"Fibber McGee and Molly" was one of the earliest radio comedies to use regular characters, nearly all of whom had recurring phrases and running gags. These included:
Actually, Wallace Wimple's wife is never heard on the show—whoever wrote this obviously never listened to the program. The "Yes" line is Wallace, chuckling, usually, after explaining that he has done something that might prove fatal to his "Big Old Wife".
Running gags.
Much of the show's humor relied on recurring gags, unseen regulars and punch lines that sometimes popped up here and there for years. The show would usually open the 30-minute broadcast with the audience in full laughter with Harlow Wilcox announcing, "The Johnson Wax Program with Fibber McGee and Molly!" In the episode of December 19, 1944, "Fibber Snoops For Presents In Closet" (at 3:59 is a perfect example of the "Hall Closet", a running gag described in detail later in this entry), Jim Jordan can be caught at the end of his audience warm-up evoking the opening laughter by quipping, "10 seconds? Oh, we got a lot of... Ooooo!"
After the program aired and rehearsal.
The radio show was run on a tight schedule. It was considered to be one of the best organized broadcasts on the networks. Jim Jordan insisted after the Tuesday broadcast, everyone affiliated with the program must take a two-day rest. Nothing is done about the following Tuesday's show until Friday morning. Then Jim and Marian Jordan get together with writer Don Quinn and agency producer Cecil Underwood to talk the next script into shape. They work in a business office because they're convinced that the business-like and efficient atmosphere helps them to get the work done in two hours. By Saturday morning, Quinn had the first draft of the script ready, and "Fibber" reads it, after which Quinn goes ahead to write the final, working script. He does this Sunday night, working all night and finishing Monday morning. Monday morning the cast- except the musical portion of it- gathers at the NBC Hollywood studios and rehearses for two hours, after which Quinn makes any changes that have been decided on. Tuesday morning the entire cast, including Billy Mils' orchestra, rehearse about four times, concluding with a complete run-through about three o'clock. At five- thirty, Pacific time, they go on the air. And this program of preparation never varies by much more than an hour from week to week. The whole atmosphere of their broadcast is simple, friendly, homey-in fact, it justifies that often-misused phrase, "One big happy family".
Show format.
For most of the show's history, the usual order of the show is the Introduction followed by a Johnson Wax plug by Harlow then his introduction to Section 1 of the script (usually 11 minutes). Billy Mills usually follows with an instrumental (or accompanied by Martha Tilton in 1941). That musical interlude then segues to Section 2 of the script, followed by a performance by the vocal group The Kings Men (occasionally featuring a solo by leader Ken Darby). The final act then ensues, with the last line usually showing the lesson learned that day, a final commercial, and then Billy Mills' theme song to fade. Later, Harlow would meet up and visit with the McGees and work in a Johnson Wax commercial, sometimes assisted by Fibber and Molly.
When McGee tells a bad joke, Molly often answers with the line "T'aint funny, McGee!", which became a familiar catch phrase during the 1940s. Molly's Uncle Dennis is one of the more common rarely heard regulars. He lives with the McGees, and is apparently an enormous alcoholic, becoming a punch line for many Fibber jokes and even the main subject of some shows in which he "disappeared".
There are numerous references and jokes about the fact that Fibber doesn't have a regular job. Mayor LaTrivia often offers McGee jobs at City Hall, and the jobs usually sound exciting when the duties are vaguely described; but they sometimes end up being very mundane. For instance, a job "looking in on the higher-ups at City Hall" turns out to be a window-cleaning job. Another interesting assignment was for Fibber to work in disguise for days at a time as the Wistful Vista Santa Claus.
McGee is very proud of past deeds, sometimes recalling an interesting nickname he picked up over the years. Each one of these nicknames is, as usual with Fibber, a bad pun. When someone told a man named Addison that McGee was a glib talker, McGee became known as "Ad Glib McGee". Or, when Fibber made expressions with his eyes, he was nicknamed "Eyes-a-muggin' McGee" (a play on the popular Stuff Smith swing tune "I'se A-muggin'"). From there Fibber jumps headfirst into a long, breathless and boastful description of his nickname, using an admirable amount of alliteration.
Mentioned for a time on the program was Otis Cadwallader, who was a schoolmate of Fibber and Molly in Peoria and Molly's boyfriend before McGee. Fibber has a long-standing grudge against Otis, making him out to seem like a self-centered, overblown hack, even though seemingly everyone else sees Cadwallader as a lovely, dashing man. Otis's feelings toward Fibber are never mentioned, giving the impression that Fibber's grudge is one-sided. As revealed late in 1942, Fibber's anger is actually a front to keep Cadwallader away, as Fibber once borrowed money from Otis and never paid it back.
The "corner of 14th and Oak" in downtown Wistful Vista was routinely given as a location for various homes, places of business and government buildings throughout the show's run.
Whenever someone asks the time it's always half-past.
McGee has a reputation for telling tall tales, and there are occasional jokes linking this propensity to his name "Fibber". In the episode "Fibber Changes His Name" (March 25, 1941), we learn that "Fibber" is his actual given name and not just a nickname. According to McGee, "I was named after my fourth cousin, Walpole J. Fimmer .. but the minister who christened me had a cold in his head."
The Closet.
None of the show's running gags was as memorable or enduring as The Closet—McGee's frequently opening and cacophonous closet, bric-a-brac clattering down and out and, often enough, over McGee's or Molly's heads. "I gotta get that closet cleaned out one of these days" was the usual McGee observation once the racket subsided. Naturally, "one of these days" almost never arrived. A good thing, too: in one famous instance, when a burglar (played by Bob Bruce) tied up McGee, McGee informed him cannily that the family's silver was "right through that door, bud... just yank it open, bud!" Naturally, the burglar took the bait and naturally, he was buried in the inevitable avalanche, long enough for the police to apprehend him.
This gag appears to have begun with the March 5, 1940, show, "Cleaning the Closet". Molly opens the closet looking for the dictionary and is promptly buried in Fibber's "stuff" ("arranged in there just the way I want it".) Cleaning out the closet becomes the show's plot, inventorying much of the contents along the way: a photo album, a rusty horseshoe, a ten-foot pole. After repacking the closet, Fibber realizes the dictionary has been put away too — and he opens the closet again. This episode also features a cameo by Gracie Allen, running for president on the Surprise Party ticket. Toward the end the September 30, 1941 show, "Back from Vacation; Gildy Says Goodbye", next-door nemesis Gildersleeve --- who has moved to Summerfield to finish raising his orphaned niece and nephew (and already begun his successful spin-off show "The Great Gildersleeve"), but has come back to Wistful Vista to wind up his affairs there, in a farewell to the show that made him famous --- opens the closet to be buried in the usual avalanche.
On at least one occasion, the gag is flipped, and the closet is silent: in "Mans Untapped Energies" (broadcast March 11, 1947), visiting Dr. Gamble makes to leave. Molly warns, "No, Doctor, not through that door, that's the hall closet!" As the audience chuckles slightly in anticipation, Fibber explains: "Oh I forgot to tell you, Molly, I straightened out the hall closet this morning!" This was certainly not the end of the gag, though, as the closet soon became cluttered once again, leading to many more disasters.
Like many such trademarks, the clattering closet began as a one-time stunt, but "the closet" was developed carefully, not being overused (it rarely appeared in more than two consecutive installments, though it never disappeared for the same length, either, at the height of its identification, and it rarely collapsed at exactly the same time from show to show), and it became the best-known running sound gag in American radio's classic period. Jack Benny's basement vault alarm ran a distant second. Both of these classic sound effects were performed by Ed Ludes and Virgil Rhymer, Hollywood-based NBC staff sound effects creators. Exactly "what" tumbled out of McGee's closet each time was never clear (except to these sound-effects men), but what signaled the end of the avalanche was always the same sound: a clear, tiny, household hand bell and McGee's inevitable postmortem. "Fibber McGee's closet" entered the American vernacular as a catch phrase synonymous with household clutter.
Sponsors.
Each episode also featured an appearance by announcer Harlow Wilcox, whose job it was to weave the second ad for the sponsor into the plot without having to break the show for a real commercial. Wilcox's introductory pitch lines were usually met with groans or humorously sarcastic lines by Fibber. During the many years that the show was sponsored by Johnson Wax, Fibber nicknamed Wilcox "Waxy", due to Wilcox's constant praises of their various products, and during the years the show was sponsored by Pet Milk, Fibber changed the nickname to "Milky". In a style not unusual for the classic radio years, the show was typically introduced as, "The Johnson Wax Program, with Fibber McGee and Molly". Johnson Wax sponsored the show through 1950; Pet Milk through 1952; and, until the show's final half-hour episode in mid-1953, Reynolds Aluminum. Fibber sometimes referred to Harlow as "Harpo".
The show also used two musical numbers per episode to break the comedy routines into sections. For most of the show's run, there would be one vocal number by The King's Men (a vocal quartet: Ken Darby, Rad Robinson, Jon Dodson, and Bud Linn), and an instrumental by The Billy Mills Orchestra. For a short time in the early 1940s, Martha Tilton would sing what was formerly the instrumental.
Before and during America's involvement in World War II, references to or about the war and the members of the Axis Powers were commonplace on the show. Just after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Jim Jordan, out of character, soberly ended the "Fibber McGee" show by inviting the studio audience to sing "America". During the show of December 9, the Mayor is seeking a globe in order to keep up with current events. Molly asks him, "Do you want one with Japan on it?" The mayor says, "Why, of course." "Then you better get one quick," Molly says, receiving thunderous applause from the studio audience.
Also commonplace were calls to action to buy war bonds (both through announcements and subtle references written into the script), and condemnation of food and supply hoarding. Though understandably part of the backlash reaction toward the Pearl Harbor attack, some jokes about the Empire of Japan certainly would be considered politically incorrect on today's airwaves. For instance, in the episode "Fix-It McGee", aired three weeks after Pearl Harbor, Fibber tells Mayor LaTrivia his "great slogan" for the war bond campaign: "Every time you buy a bond, you slap a Jap across the pond." The term "Jap" was in common usage in virtually all American media during this period.
On the other hand, the Jordans gladly cooperated in turning the show over to a half-hour devoted entirely to patriotic music on the day of the D-Day invasion in 1944, with the couple speaking only at the opening and the closing of the broadcast. This show remains available to collectors amidst many a "Fibber McGee and Molly" packaging.
When the shows were broadcast overseas by the Armed Forces Radio Service (AFRS), all three commercials were eliminated from the program. Harlow Wilcox's middle ad was edited out, and the two advertisements at the beginning and end of the show were replaced by musical numbers, so that the show on AFRS would have two numbers by Billy Mills and the Orchestra, and two by The King's Men.
The Jordans were experts at transforming the ethnic humor of vaudeville into more rounded comic characters, no doubt due in part to the affection felt for the famous supporting cast members who voiced these roles, including Bill Thompson (as the Old Timer and Wimple), Harold Peary (as Gildersleeve), Gale Gordon (as LaTrivia), Arthur Q. Bryan (as Dr. Gamble; Bryan also voiced Elmer Fudd for the Warner Brothers Looney Tunes cartoons, which also borrowed lines from "Fibber McGee and Molly" from time to time), Isabel Randolph (as Mrs. Uppington), Marlin Hurt (a white male who played in dialect the McGee's maid, Beulah), and others. They were also expert at their own running gags and catch phrases, many of which entered the American vernacular: "That ain't the way "I" heeard it!"; "'T'ain't funny, McGee!" and "Heavenly days!" were the three best known.
Spin-offs.
"Fibber McGee and Molly" spun two supporting characters off into their own shows. By far the most successful and popular was Harold Peary's Gildersleeve, spun into "The Great Gildersleeve" in 1941. This show introduced single parenthood of a sort to creative broadcasting: the pompous, previously married Gildersleeve now moved to Summerfield, became single (although the missing wife was never explained), and raised his orphaned, spirited niece and nephew, while dividing his time between running his manufacturing business and (eventually) becoming the town water commissioner. In one episode, the McGees arrived in Summerfield for a visit with their old neighbor with hilarious results: McGee inadvertently learns Gildersleeve is engaged, and he practically needs to be chloroformed to perpetuate the secret a little longer.
Peary returned the favor in a memorable 1944 "Fibber McGee & Molly" episode in which neither of the title characters appeared: Jim Jordan was recovering from a bout of pneumonia (this would be written into the show the following week, when the Jordans returned), and the story line involved Gildersleeve and nephew Leroy hoping to visit the McGees at home during a train layover in Wistful Vista, but finding Fibber and Molly not at home. At the end of the episode, Gildersleeve discovers the couple had left in a hurry that morning when they received "Gildy's" letter saying he would be stopping over in Wistful Vista.
Marlin Hurt's "Beulah" was also spun off, leading to both a radio and television show that would eventually star Hattie McDaniel and Ethel Waters.
Jim and Marian Jordan themselves occasionally appeared on other programs, away from their Fibber and Molly characters. One memorable episode of "Suspense" ("Backseat Driver", 02-03-1949) cast the Jordans as victims of a car-jacking; Jim Jordan's tense, interior monologues were especially dramatic.
Films.
The Jordans portrayed their characters in four movies. In the early years of the radio show, they were supporting characters in the 1937 Paramount film "This Way Please", starring Charles "Buddy" Rogers and Betty Grable. Once the show hit its stride, they had leading roles in the RKO Radio Pictures films "Look Who's Laughing" (1941), "Here We Go Again" (1942), and "Heavenly Days" (1944).
The first two RKO films are generally considered the best, as they co-star fellow radio stars Edgar Bergen and Charlie McCarthy. Harold Peary also appears in both as Gildersleeve, with Arthur Q. Bryan, Bill Thompson, Harlow Wilcox, Gale Gordon, and Isabel Randolph appearing in both their show roles and as other characters. Bill Thompson in "Look Who's Laughing" played two parts: The pushy sales-man, and the man who shouted "It's Hillary Horton". Gale Gordon played Otis Cadwalader, Molly's ex-boyfriend in "Here We Go Again". Arthur Q. Bryan played the Mayor's aide in "Look Who's Laughing". The Jordans' participation in "Look Who's Laughing" was set up in the Fibber McGee & Molly episode "Amusement Park" (6/17/41), in which Gale Gordon played an RKO pictures representative who followed the McGees around the amusement park and chose the McGees as a representative American couple to star in a movie with Edger Bergen and Charlie McCarthy. The day before the film's real-life premiere in San Francisco, the movie had its fictional opening in Wistful Vista during that week's radio episode, and Bergen and McCarthy made a guest appearance ("Premiere of Look Who's Laughing" (11/11/41)).
"Look Who's Laughing" has been released on VHS and DVD as part of the "Lucille Ball RKO Collection". "Here We Go Again" has been released on VHS and will be released on DVD on January 14, 2014, through Warner Archives. "Heavenly Days" will also be included in the January 2014 DVD release of "Here We Go Again" as part of a "double feature" DVD. "Look Who's Laughing", "Here We Go Again" and "Heavenly Days" have been shown on Turner Classic Movies.
Other films.
Other films featured the McGees' neighbors. The first film was called "Comin' Round the Mountain" (1940) and featured the McGees' neighbors The Old-Timer (played by Bill Thompson) and Gildersleeve, as the mayor of the town. Gildersleeve's character was in many other films before "The Great Gildersleeve" show and movies. Abigale Uppington is in the film "County Fair" along with Harold Peary, and his future radio show co-star Shirley Mitchell (who also played Leila Ransom in "The Great Gildersleeve").
Television.
An attempt at getting the McGees onto television came in September 1959, produced by William Asher for NBC (and co-sponsored by Singer Corporation and Standard Brands), with younger actors Bob Sweeney and Cathy Lewis in the roles. The show also featured Harold Peary as Mayor LaTrivia, rather than as Gildersleeve. The show was unable to recreate the flavor and humor of the original and did not survive its first season; in fact, it did not even last through January 1960. But the Jordans themselves had resisted television far earlier. "They were trying to push us into TV, and we were reluctant," Jim Jordan told an interviewer many years later. "Our friends advised us, 'Don't do it until you need to. You have this value in radio—milk it dry.'"
Changes.
In 1953, Marian Jordan's periodic health problems necessitated the shortening of "Fibber McGee and Molly" into a nightly fifteen-minute program, recorded without a studio audience in single sessions, the better to enable Jordan to rest. This timing was sadly appropriate, as classic radio had entered its dying days. Still, the McGees remained favorite presences on radio even after the quarter-hour edition ended in 1956, appearing in shorts from 1957 to 1959 on the NBC's "Monitor" radio program as "Just Molly and Me".
Radio historian Gerald S. Nachman has written that the Jordans anticipated renewing their contract with NBC for another three years when Marian's battle against ovarian cancer ended with her death in 1961. In the 1970s, Jim Jordan briefly returned to acting. An episode of NBC's "Chico and the Man" featured a surprise appearance by Jordan as a friendly neighborhood mechanic. Jordan also lent his voice to Disney's animated film, "The Rescuers" (1977) and reprised his role as Fibber McGee (complete with the closet gag) in an advertisement for AARP. He died in 1988—a year before "Fibber McGee and Molly" was inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame.
Jim Jordan married Gretchen Stewart after Marian's death. Gretchen and the Jordan children donated the manuscripts of "Smackout" and "Fibber McGee and Molly" to Chicago's Museum of Broadcast Communications after his death in 1988. Perhaps fittingly for his longtime radio alter ego, Jordan died on April Fool's Day.
The show has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame next to the NBC studios where the show was performed. The S.C. Johnson Company has preserved more than 700 shows it sponsored for fifteen years.

</doc>
<doc id="83112" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83112" title="1972 Summer Olympics">
1972 Summer Olympics

The 1972 Summer Olympics (German: "Olympische Sommerspiele 1972"), officially known as the Games of the XX Olympiad, was an international multi-sport event held in Munich, West Germany, from August 26 to September 11, 1972.
The sporting nature of the event was largely overshadowed by the Munich massacre in which eleven Israeli athletes and coaches and a West German police officer were killed. Five Black September Palestinian terrorists died.
The 1972 Summer Olympics were the second Summer Olympics to be held in Germany, after the 1936 Games in Berlin, which had taken place under the Nazi regime. Mindful of the connection, the West German Government was eager to take the opportunity of the Munich Olympics to present a new, democratic and optimistic Germany to the world, as shown by the Games' official motto, "Die Heiteren Spiele", or "the cheerful Games". The logo of the Games was a blue solar logo (the "Bright Sun") by Otl Aicher, the designer and director of the visual conception commission. The Olympic mascot, the dachshund "Waldi", was the first officially named Olympic mascot. The Olympic Fanfare was composed by Herbert Rehbein, a companion of Bert Kaempfert.
The Olympic Park ("Olympiapark") is based on Frei Otto's plans and after the Games became a Munich landmark. The competition sites, designed by architect Günther Behnisch, included the Olympic swimming hall, the Olympics Hall ("Olympiahalle", a multipurpose facility) and the Olympic Stadium ("Olympiastadion"), and an Olympic village very close to the park. The design of the stadium was considered revolutionary, with sweeping canopies of acrylic glass stabilized by metal ropes, used on such a large scale for the first time.
Host city selection.
Munich won its Olympic bid on April 26, 1966, at the 64th IOC Session at Rome, Italy, over bids presented by Detroit, Madrid, and Montréal. Montreal would eventually host the following Olympic games in 1976.
Munich massacre.
The Games were largely overshadowed by what has come to be known as the "Munich massacre". On September 5, a group of eight members of the Black September Palestinian terrorist organization broke into the Olympic Village and took nine Israeli athletes, coaches and officials hostage in their apartments. Two of the hostages who resisted were killed in the first moments of the break-in; the subsequent standoff in the Olympic Village lasted for almost 18 hours.
Late in the evening of September 5, the terrorists and their hostages were transferred by helicopter to the military airport of Fürstenfeldbruck, ostensibly to board a plane bound for an undetermined Arab country. The German authorities planned to ambush them there, but underestimated the numbers of their opposition and were thus undermanned. During a botched rescue attempt, all of the Israeli hostages were killed. Four of them were shot, then incinerated when one of the terrorists detonated a grenade inside the helicopter in which the hostages were sitting. The five remaining hostages were then machine-gunned to death.
All but three of the terrorists were killed as well. Although arrested and imprisoned pending trial, they were released by the West German government on October 29, 1972, in exchange for a hijacked Lufthansa jet. Two of those three were supposedly hunted down and assassinated later by the Mossad. Jamal Al-Gashey, who is believed to be the sole survivor, is still living today in hiding in an unspecified African country with his wife and two children. The Olympic events were suspended several hours after the initial attack, but once the incident was concluded, Avery Brundage, the International Olympic Committee president, declared that "the Games must go on". A memorial ceremony was then held in the Olympic stadium, and the competitions resumed after a stoppage of 24 hours. The attack prompted heightened security at subsequent Olympics beginning with the 1976 Winter Olympics. Security at Olympics was heightened further beginning with the 2002 Winter Olympics, as they were the first to take place since September 11, 2001.
The massacre led the German federal government to re-examine its anti-terrorism policies, which at the time were dominated by a pacifist approach adopted after World War II. This led to the creation of the elite counter-terrorist unit GSG 9, similar to the British SAS. It also led Israel to launch an aggressive campaign known as Operation Wrath of God, in which those suspected of involvement were systematically tracked down and assassinated.
The events of the Munich massacre were chronicled in the Oscar-winning documentary, "One Day in September". An account of the aftermath is also dramatized in three films: the 1976 made-for-TV movie "21 Hours at Munich", the 1986 made-for-TV movie "Sword of Gideon" and Steven Spielberg's 2005 film "Munich". In her film "1972", Artist Sarah Morris interviews Dr. Georg Sieber, a former police psychiatrist who advised the Olympics' security team, about the events and aftermath of Black September.
Medals awarded.
The 1972 Summer Olympic programme featured 195 events in the following 21 sports:
Medal count.
These are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1972 Games.
Participating National Olympic Committees.
Eleven nations made their first Olympic appearance in Munich: Albania, Dahomey (now Benin), Gabon, North Korea, Lesotho, Malawi, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Swaziland, Togo, Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso).
The Parade of Nations was organised according to the German alphabet, with the first country following Greece being Egypt, whilst East Germany was referred to as "DDR".
Rhodesia's invitation to take part in the 1972 Summer Games was withdrawn by the International Olympic Committee four days before the opening ceremony, in response to African countries' protests against the Rhodesian government. (Rhodesia did, however, compete in the 1972 Summer Paralympics, held a little earlier in Heidelberg.)

</doc>
<doc id="83115" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83115" title="1968 Summer Olympics">
1968 Summer Olympics

The 1968 Summer Olympics (Spanish: "Juegos Olímpicos de Verano de 1968"), officially known as the Games of the XIX Olympiad, were an international multi-sport event held in Mexico City, Mexico, in October 1968.
These were the first Olympic Games to be staged in Latin America and the first to be staged in a Spanish-speaking country. They were also the first Games to be held in a developing country (previously, all Olympic Games had been held in First World countries). They were also the first Games to use an all-weather (hard) track for track and field events instead of a traditional cinder track. 
The 1968 Games were the third to be held in autumn, after the 1956 Games in Melbourne and the 1964 Games in Tokyo. The Mexican Student Movement of 1968 happened concurrently and the Olympic Games were correlated to the government's repression.
Host city selection.
On October 18, 1963, at the 60th IOC Session in Baden-Baden, West Germany, Mexico City finished ahead of bids from Detroit, Buenos Aires and Lyon to host the Games.
Olympic torch relay.
The 1968 torch relay recreated the route taken by Christopher Columbus to the New World, journeying from Greece through Italy and Spain to San Salvador Island, Bahamas, and then on to Mexico. American sculptor James Metcalf, an expatriate in Mexico, won the commission to forge the Olympic torch for the 1968 Summer Games.
Controversies.
South Africa.
South Africa was provisionally invited to the Games, on the understanding that all segregation and discrimination in sport would be eliminated by the 1972 Games. However, African countries and black American athletes promised to boycott the Games if South Africa was present, and Eastern Bloc countries threatened to do likewise. In April 1968 the IOC conceded that "it would be most unwise for South Africa to participate".
Tlatelolco massacre.
Responding to growing social unrest and protests, the government of Mexico had increased economic and political suppression, against labor unions in particular, in the decade building up to the Olympics. A series of protest marches in the city in August gathered significant attendance, with an estimated 500,000 taking part on August 27. President Gustavo Díaz Ordaz ordered the occupation of the National Autonomous University of Mexico in September, but protests continued. Using the prominence brought by the Olympics, students gathered in Plaza de las Tres Culturas in Tlatelolco to call for greater civil and democratic rights and showed disdain for the Olympics with slogans such as "¡No queremos olimpiadas, queremos revolución!" ("We don't want Olympics, we want revolution!").
Ten days before the start of the Olympics, the government ordered the gathering in Plaza de las Tres Culturas to be broken up. Some 5000 soldiers and 200 tankettes surrounded the plaza. Hundreds of protesters and civilians were killed and over 1000 were arrested. At the time, the event was portrayed in the national media as the military suppression of a violent student uprising, but later analysis indicates that the gathering was peaceful prior to the army's advance.
Black Power salute.
On October 16, 1968, black American sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos, the gold and bronze medalists in the men's 200-meter race, took their places on the podium for the medal ceremony wearing black socks without shoes and civil rights badges, lowered their heads and each defiantly raised a black-gloved fist as the "Star Spangled Banner" was played in solidarity with the Black Freedom Movement in the United States. Both were members of the Olympic Project for Human Rights. Some people (particularly IOC president Avery Brundage) felt that a political statement had no place in the international forum of the Olympic Games. In an immediate response to their actions, Smith and Carlos were suspended from the U.S. team by Brundage and banned from the Olympic Village. Those who opposed the protest said the actions disgraced all Americans. Supporters, on the other hand, praised the men for their bravery.
Peter Norman, the Australian sprinter who came second in the 200 m race, also wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge during the medal ceremony. Norman was the one who suggested that Carlos and Smith wear one glove each. His actions resulted in him being ostracized by Australian media and a reprimand by his country's Olympic authorities, who did not send him or any other male sprinters at all to the 1972 games (despite easily making the qualifying time). When Australia hosted the 2000 Summer Olympics, he was not invited to join other Australian medallists at the opening ceremony. In 2006, after Norman died of a heart attack, Smith and Carlos were pallbearers at Norman's funeral.
Věra Čáslavská.
In another incident, while standing on the medal podium after the balance beam event final where Natalia Kuchinskaya of the Soviet Union had controversially taken the Gold, Czechoslovakian gymnast Věra Čáslavská quietly turned her head down and away during the playing of the Soviet national anthem. The action was Čáslavská's silent protest against the recent Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, and was repeated when she accepted her medal for her floor exercise routine when the judges changed the preliminary scores of the Soviet Larisa Petrik to tie with Čáslavská. While Čáslavská's countrymen supported her actions and her outspoken opposition to Communism (she had publicly signed and supported Ludvik Vaculik's "Two Thousand Words" manifesto), the new regime responded by banning her from both sporting events and international travel for many years and made her an outcast from society.
Medals awarded.
The 1968 Summer Olympic programme featured 172 events in the following 18 sports:
Ana (100)
Demonstration sports.
The organizers declined to hold a judo tournament at the Olympics, even though it had been a full-medal sport four years earlier. This was the last time judo was not included in the Olympic games.
Participating National Olympic Committees.
East Germany and West Germany competed as separate entities for the first time in at a Summer Olympiad, and would remain so through 1988. Barbados competed for the first time as an independent country.
Also competing for the first time in a Summer Olympiad were British Honduras (now Belize), Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo (as Congo-Kinshasa), El Salvador, Guinea, Honduras, Kuwait, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Sierra Leone, and the United States Virgin Islands.
Singapore returned to the Games as an independent country after competing as part of the Malaysian team in 1964. Suriname actually competed for the first time (in 1960 its lone athlete withdrew from competition due to a scheduling error.)
Boycotting countries.
North Korea withdrew its athletes from Cuba immediately prior to the beginning of the Olympics when the IOC refused to refer to the country by its official name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea or DPRK.
Medal count.
These are the top ten nations that won medals at the 1968 Games. Host Mexico won 3 of each color of medal.

</doc>
<doc id="83117" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83117" title="Henry James">
Henry James

Henry James, OM ( – ) was an American writer. He is regarded as one of the key figures of 19th-century literary realism. He was the son of Henry James, Sr. and the brother of philosopher and psychologist William James and diarist Alice James.
He is best known for a number of novels showing Americans encountering Europe and Europeans. His method of writing from a character's point of view allowed him to explore issues related to consciousness and perception, and his style in later works has been compared to impressionist painting. His imaginative use of point of view, interior monologue and unreliable narrators brought a new depth to narrative fiction.
James contributed significantly to literary criticism, particularly in his insistence that writers be allowed the greatest possible freedom in presenting their view of the world. James claimed that a text must first and foremost be realistic and contain a representation of life that is recognisable to its readers. Good novels, to James, show life in action and are, most importantly, interesting.
In addition to his voluminous works of fiction he published articles and books of travel, biography, autobiography, and criticism, and wrote plays. James alternated between America and Europe for the first twenty years of his life; eventually he settled in England, becoming a British subject in 1915, one year before his death. James was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1911, 1912, and 1916.
Life.
The early years.
James was born at 2 Washington Place in New York City on 15 April 1843. His parents were Mary Walsh and Henry James, Sr. His father was intelligent, steadfastly congenial, and a lecturer and philosopher who had inherited independent means from his father, an Albany banker and investor. Mary came from a wealthy family long settled in New York City, and her sister Katherine lived with the family for an extended period of time. Henry, Jr. had three brothers, William who was one year his senior and younger brothers Wilkinson and Robertson. His younger sister was Alice.
The family first lived in Albany and then moved to Fourteenth Street in New York City when James was still a young boy. His education was calculated by his father to expose him to many influences, primarily scientific and philosophical; it was described as "extraordinarily haphazard and promiscuous." James did not share the usual education in Latin and Greek classics. Between 1855 and 1860, the James' household traveled to London, Paris, Geneva, Boulogne-sur-Mer and Newport, Rhode Island, according to the father's current interests and publishing ventures, retreating to the United States when funds were low. Henry studied primarily with tutors and briefly attended a few schools while the family traveled in Europe. Their longest stays were in France, where Henry began to feel at home and became fluent in French.
In 1860 the family returned to Newport. There Henry became a friend of the painter John La Farge, who introduced him to French literature, and in particular, to Balzac. James later called Balzac his "greatest master," and said that he had learned more about the craft of fiction from him than from anyone else.
In the autumn of 1861 Henry received an injury, probably to his back, while fighting a fire. This injury, which resurfaced at times throughout his life, made him unfit for military service in the American Civil War.
In 1864 the James family moved to Boston, Massachusetts to be near William, who had enrolled first in the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard and then in the medical school. In 1862 he attended Harvard Law School, but realized that he was not interested in studying law. He pursued his interest in literature and associated with authors and critics William Dean Howells and Charles Eliot Norton in Boston and Cambridge, formed lifelong friendships with Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., the future Supreme Court Justice, and with James and Annie Fields, his first professional mentors.
His first published work was a review of a stage performance, "Miss Maggie Mitchell in "Fanchon the Cricket,"" published in 1863. About a year later, "A Tragedy of Error", his first short story, was published. James's first payment was for an appreciation of Sir Walter Scott's novels, written for the "North American Review". He wrote fiction and non-fiction pieces for "The Nation" and "Atlantic Monthly", where Fields was editor. In 1870 he published his first novel, "Watch and Ward".
During a fourteen-month trip through Europe in 1869-70 he met Ruskin, Dickens, Matthew Arnold, William Morris, and George Eliot. Rome impressed him profoundly. "Here I am then in the Eternal City," he wrote to his brother William. "At last—for the first time—I live!" He attempted to support himself as a free-lance writer in Rome, and then secured a position as Paris correspondent for the "New York Tribune", through the influence of its editor John Hay. When these efforts failed he returned to New York City. Between 1874-1875 he published "Transatlantic Sketches", "A Passionate Pilgrim", and "Roderick Hudson". During this early period in his career he was influenced by Hawthorne.
In 1869 he settled in London. There he established relationships with Macmillan and other publishers, who paid for serial installments that they would later publish in book form. The audience for these serialized novels were largely made up of middle-class women, and James struggled to fashion serious literary work within the strictures imposed by editors' and publishers' notions of what was suitable for young women to read. He lived in rented rooms but was able to join gentlemen's clubs that had libraries and where he could entertain male friends. He was introduced to English society by Henry Adams and Charles Milnes Gaskell, the latter introducing him to the Travellers' and the Reform Clubs.
In the fall of 1875 he moved to the Latin Quarter of Paris. Aside from two trips to America, he spent the next three decades—the rest of his life—in Europe. In Paris he met Zola, Alphonse Daudet, Maupassant, Turgenev, and others. He stayed in Paris only a year before moving to London.
In England he met the leading figures of politics and culture. He continued to be a prolific writer, producing "The American" (1877), "The Europeans" (1878), a revision of "Watch and Ward" (1878), "French Poets and Novelists" (1878), "Hawthorne" (1879), and several shorter works of fiction. In 1878 "Daisy Miller" established his fame on both sides of the Atlantic. It drew notice perhaps mostly because it depicted a woman whose behavior is outside the social norms of Europe. He also began his first masterpiece, "The Portrait of a Lady," which would appear in 1881.
In 1877 he first visited Wenlock Abbey in Shropshire, home of his friend Charles Milnes Gaskell whom he had met through Henry Adams. He was much inspired by the darkly romantic Abbey and the surrounding countryside, which features in his essay Abbeys and Castles. In particular the gloomy monastic fishponds behind the Abbey are said to have inspired the lake in Turn of the Screw. 
While living in London, James continued to follow the careers of the "French realists", Émile Zola in particular. Their stylistic methods influenced his own work in the years to come. Hawthorne's influence on him faded during this period, replaced by George Eliot and Ivan Turgenev. 1879-1882 saw the publication of "The Europeans", "Washington Square", "Confidence", and "The Portrait of a Lady". He visited America in 1882-1883, then returned to London.
The period from 1881 to 1883 was marked by several losses. His mother died in 1881, followed by his father a few months later, and then by his brother Wilkie. Emerson, an old family friend, died in 1882. His friend Turgenev died in 1883.
The middle years.
In 1884 James made another visit to Paris. There he met again with Zola, Daudet, and Goncourt. He had been following the careers of the French "realist" or "naturalist" writers, and was increasingly influenced by them. In 1886 he published "The Bostonians" and "The Princess Casamassima", both influenced by the French writers he'd studied assiduously. Critical reaction and sales were poor. He wrote to Howells that the books had hurt his career rather than helped because they had "reduced the desire, and demand, for my productions to zero". During this time he became friends with Robert Louis Stevenson, John Singer Sargent, Edmund Gosse, George du Maurier, Paul Bourget, and Constance Fenimore Woolson. His third novel from the 1880s was "The Tragic Muse." Although he was following the precepts of Zola in his novels of the 80s, their tone and attitude are closer to the fiction of Alphonse Daudet. The lack of critical and financial success for his novels during this period led him to try writing for the theater. (His dramatic works and his experiences with theater are discussed below.)
After the failure of "Guy Domville" James was near despair and thoughts of death plagued him. The years spent on dramatic works were not entirely a loss. As he moved into the last phase of his career he found ways to adapt dramatic techniques into the novel form. In the late 80s and throughout the 90s James made several trips through Europe.
He spent a long stay in Italy in 1887. In that year "The Aspern Papers", and "The Reverberator" were published. In 1897–1898 he moved to Rye, Sussex, and wrote "The Turn of the Screw". 1899–1900 saw the publication of "The Awkward Age" and "The Sacred Fount".
The late years.
During 1902–1904 he wrote "The Ambassadors", "The Wings of the Dove", and "The Golden Bowl". In 1905 he revisited America and lectured on Balzac. In 1906–1910 he published "The American Scene" and edited the "New York Edition", a twenty-four volume collection of his works. In 1910 his brother William died. In 1913 he wrote his autobiographies, "A Small Boy and Others", and "Notes of a Son and Brother". After the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he did war work. In 1915 he became a British subject. In 1916 he was awarded the Order of Merit. He died on February 28, 1916, in Chelsea, London. His ashes were buried in Cambridge cemetery in Massachusetts.
James the playwright.
At several points in his career James wrote plays, beginning with one-act plays written for periodicals in 1869 and 1871 and a dramatization of his popular novella "Daisy Miller" in 1882. From 1890 to 1892, having received a bequest that freed him from magazine publication, he made a strenuous effort to succeed on the London stage, writing a half-dozen plays of which only one, a dramatization of his novel "The American," was produced. This play was performed for several years by a touring repertory company and had a respectable run in London, but did not earn very much money for James. His other plays written at this time were not produced. 
In 1893, however, he responded to a request from actor-manager George Alexander for a serious play for the opening of his renovated St. James's Theatre, and wrote a long drama, "Guy Domville", which Alexander produced. There was a noisy uproar on the opening night, 5 January 1895, with hissing from the gallery when James took his bow after the final curtain, and the author was considerably upset. The play received moderately good reviews and had a modest run of four weeks before being taken off to make way for Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest", which Alexander thought would have better prospects for the coming season.
After the stresses and disappointment of these efforts James insisted that he would write no more for the theater, but within weeks had agreed to write a curtain-raiser for Ellen Terry. This became the one-act "Summersoft", which he later rewrote into a short story, "Covering End", and then expanded into a full-length play, "The High Bid", which had a brief run in London in 1907, when James made another concerted effort to write for the stage. He wrote three new plays, two of which were in production when the death of Edward VII on 6 May 1910 plunged London into mourning and theaters closed. Discouraged by failing health and the stresses of theatrical work, James did not renew his efforts in the theater, but recycled his plays as successful novels. "The Outcry" was a best-seller in the United States when it was published in 1911. During the years 1890–1893 when he was most engaged with the theater, James wrote a good deal of theatrical criticism and assisted Elizabeth Robins and others in translating and producing Henrik Ibsen for the first time in London.
Leon Edel argued in his psychoanalytic biography that James was traumatized by the opening night uproar that greeted "Guy Domville", and that it plunged him into a prolonged depression. The successful later novels, in Edel's view, were the result of a kind of self-analysis, expressed in fiction, which partly freed him from his fears. Other biographers and scholars have not accepted this account, however; the more common view being that of F.O. Matthiessen, who wrote: "Instead of being crushed by the collapse of his hopes the theatre... he felt a resurgence of new energy."
James' biographers.
James regularly rejected suggestions that he marry, and after settling in London proclaimed himself "a bachelor". F. W. Dupee, in several volumes on the James family, originated the theory that he had been in love with his cousin Mary ("Minnie") Temple, but that a neurotic fear of sex kept him from admitting such affections: "James's invalidism ... was itself the symptom of some fear of or scruple against sexual love on his part." Dupee used an episode from James's memoir "A Small Boy and Others," recounting a dream of a Napoleonic image in the Louvre, to exemplify James's romanticism about Europe, a Napoleonic fantasy into which he fled.
Dupee had not had access to the James family papers and worked principally from James's published memoir of his older brother, William, and the limited collection of letters edited by Percy Lubbock, heavily weighted toward James's last years. His account therefore moved directly from James's childhood, when he trailed after his older brother, to elderly invalidism. As more material became available to scholars, including the diaries of contemporaries and hundreds of affectionate and sometimes erotic letters written by James to younger men, the picture of neurotic celibacy gave way to a portrait of a closeted homosexual, although as author Terry Eagleton has stated, "... gay critics debate exactly how repressed his (probable) homosexuality was ..."
James's letters to expatriate American sculptor Hendrik Christian Andersen have attracted particular attention. James met the 27-year-old Andersen in Rome in 1899, when James was 56, and wrote letters to Andersen that are intensely emotional: "I hold you, dearest boy, in my innermost love, & count on your feeling me—in every throb of your soul". In a letter of 6 May 1904, to his brother William, James referred to himself as "always your hopelessly celibate even though sexagenarian Henry". How accurate that description might have been is the subject of contention among James's biographers, but the letters to Andersen were occasionally quasi-erotic: "I put, my dear boy, my arm around you, & feel the pulsation, thereby, as it were, of our excellent future & your admirable endowment." To his homosexual friend Howard Sturgis, James could write: "I repeat, almost to indiscretion, that I could live with you. Meanwhile I can only try to live without you."
His many letters to the many young gay men among his close male friends are more forthcoming. In a letter to Howard Sturgis, following a long visit, James refers jocularly to their "happy little congress of two" and in letters to Hugh Walpole he pursues convoluted jokes and puns about their relationship, referring to himself as an elephant who "paws you oh so benevolently" and winds about Walpole his "well meaning old trunk". His letters to Walter Berry printed by the Black Sun Press have long been celebrated for their lightly veiled eroticism.
He corresponded in almost equally extravagant language with his many female friends, writing, for example, to fellow-novelist Lucy Clifford: "Dearest Lucy! What shall I say? when I love you so very, very much, and see you nine times for once that I see Others! Therefore I think that—if you want it made clear to the meanest intelligence—I love you more than I love Others." To his New York friend Mary Cadwalader Jones: "Dearest Mary Cadwalader. I yearn over you, but I yearn in vain; & your long silence really breaks my heart, mystifies, depresses, almost alarms me, to the point even of making me wonder if poor unconscious & doting old Célimare pet name for James has 'done' anything, in some dark somnambulism of the spirit, which has ... given you a bad moment, or a wrong impression, or a 'colourable pretext' ... However these things may be, he loves you as tenderly as ever; nothing, to the end of time, will ever detach him from you, & he remembers those Eleventh St. matutinal "intimes" hours, those telephonic matinées, as the most romantic of his life ..." His long friendship with American novelist Constance Fenimore Woolson, in whose house he lived for a number of weeks in Italy in 1887, and his shock and grief over her suicide in 1894, are discussed in detail in Leon Edel's biography and play a central role in a study by Lyndall Gordon. (Edel conjectured that Woolson was in love with James and killed herself in part because of his coldness, but Woolson's biographers have strongly objected to Edel's account.)
Works.
Style and themes.
James is one of the major figures of trans-Atlantic literature. His works frequently juxtapose characters from the Old World (Europe), embodying a feudal civilization that is beautiful, often corrupt, and alluring, and from the New World (United States), where people are often brash, open, and assertive and embody the virtues—freedom and a more highly evolved moral character—of the new American society. James explores this clash of personalities and cultures, in stories of personal relationships in which power is exercised well or badly. His protagonists were often young American women facing oppression or abuse, and as his secretary Theodora Bosanquet remarked in her monograph "Henry James at Work":
Critics have jokingly described three phases in the development of James's prose: "James I, James II, and The Old Pretender." He wrote short stories and plays. Finally, in his third and last period he returned to the long, serialised novel. Beginning in the second period, but most noticeably in the third, he increasingly abandoned direct statement in favour of frequent double negatives, and complex descriptive imagery. Single paragraphs began to run for page after page, in which an initial noun would be succeeded by pronouns surrounded by clouds of adjectives and prepositional clauses, far from their original referents, and verbs would be deferred and then preceded by a series of adverbs. The overall effect could be a vivid evocation of a scene as perceived by a sensitive observer. It has been debated whether this change of style was engendered by James' shifting from writing to dictating to a typist, a change made during the composition of "What Maisie Knew."
In its intense focus on the consciousness of his major characters, James's later work foreshadows extensive developments in 20th century fiction. Indeed, he might have influenced stream-of-consciousness writers such as Virginia Woolf, who not only read some of his novels but also wrote essays about them. Both contemporary and modern readers have found the late style difficult and unnecessary; his friend Edith Wharton, who admired him greatly, said that there were passages in his work that were all but incomprehensible. James was harshly portrayed by H. G. Wells as a hippopotamus laboriously attempting to pick up a pea that had got into a corner of its cage. The "late James" style was ably parodied by Max Beerbohm in "The Mote in the Middle Distance". He was afflicted with a stutter and compensated by speaking slowly and deliberately.
More important for his work overall may have been his position as an expatriate, and in other ways an outsider, living in Europe. While he came from middle-class and provincial beginnings (seen from the perspective of European polite society) he worked very hard to gain access to all levels of society, and the settings of his fiction range from working class to aristocratic, and often describe the efforts of middle-class Americans to make their way in European capitals. He confessed he got some of his best story ideas from gossip at the dinner table or at country house weekends. He worked for a living, however, and lacked the experiences of select schools, university, and army service, the common bonds of masculine society. He was furthermore a man whose tastes and interests were, according to the prevailing standards of Victorian era Anglo-American culture, rather feminine, and who was shadowed by the cloud of prejudice that then and later accompanied suspicions of his homosexuality. Edmund Wilson famously compared James's objectivity to Shakespeare's:
It is also possible to see many of James's stories as psychological thought-experiments. In his preface to the New York edition of "The American" he describes the development of the story in his mind as exactly such: the "situation" of an American, "some robust but insidiously beguiled and
betrayed, some cruelly wronged, compatriot..." with the focus of the story being on the response of this wronged man. "The Portrait of a Lady" may be an experiment to see what happens when an idealistic young woman suddenly becomes very rich. In many of his tales, characters seem to exemplify alternate futures and possibilities, as most markedly in "The Jolly Corner", in which the protagonist and a ghost-doppelganger live alternate American and European lives; and in others, like "The Ambassadors," an older James seems fondly to regard his own younger self facing a crucial moment.
Major novels.
The first period of James's fiction, usually considered to have culminated in "The Portrait of a Lady", concentrated on the contrast between Europe and America. The style of these novels is generally straightforward and, though personally characteristic, well within the norms of 19th century fiction. "Roderick Hudson" (1875) is a Künstlerroman that traces the development of the title character, an extremely talented sculptor. Although the book shows some signs of immaturity—this was James's first serious attempt at a full-length novel—it has attracted favourable comment due to the vivid realisation of the three major characters: Roderick Hudson, superbly gifted but unstable and unreliable; Rowland Mallet, Roderick's limited but much more mature friend and patron; and Christina Light, one of James's most enchanting and maddening femmes fatales. The pair of Hudson and Mallet has been seen as representing the two sides of James's own nature: the wildly imaginative artist and the brooding conscientious mentor.
In "The Portrait of a Lady" (1881) James concluded the first phase of his career with a novel that remains his most popular piece of long fiction. The story is of a spirited young American woman, Isabel Archer, who "affronts her destiny" and finds it overwhelming. She inherits a large amount of money and subsequently becomes the victim of Machiavellian scheming by two American expatriates. The narrative is set mainly in Europe, especially in England and Italy. Generally regarded as the masterpiece of his early phase, "The Portrait of a Lady" is described as a psychological novel, exploring the minds of his characters, and almost a work of social science, exploring the differences between Europeans and Americans, the old and the new worlds.
The second period of James's career, which extends from the publication of "The Portrait of a Lady" through the end of the nineteenth century, features less popular novels including "The Princess Casamassima", published serially in "The Atlantic Monthly" in 1885–1886, and "The Bostonians", published serially in "The Century Magazine" during the same period. This period also featured James's celebrated novella, "The Turn of the Screw".
The third period of James's career reached its most significant achievement in three novels published just around the start of the 20th century: "The Wings of the Dove" (1902), "The Ambassadors" (1903), and "The Golden Bowl" (1904). Critic F. O. Matthiessen called this "trilogy" James's major phase, and these novels have certainly received intense critical study. It was the second-written of the books, "The Wings of the Dove" (1902) that was the first published. This novel tells the story of Milly Theale, an American heiress stricken with a serious disease, and her impact on the people around her. Some of these people befriend Milly with honourable motives, while others are more self-interested. James stated in his autobiographical books that Milly was based on Minny Temple, his beloved cousin who died at an early age of tuberculosis. He said that he attempted in the novel to wrap her memory in the "beauty and dignity of art".
Shorter narratives.
James was particularly interested in what he called the "beautiful and blest "nouvelle"", or the longer form of short narrative. Still, he produced a number of very short stories in which he achieved notable compression of sometimes complex subjects. The following narratives are representative of James's achievement in the shorter forms of fiction.
Non-fiction.
Beyond his fiction, James was one of the more important literary critics in the history of the novel. In his classic essay "The Art of Fiction" (1884), he argued against rigid prescriptions on the novelist's choice of subject and method of treatment. He maintained that the widest possible freedom in content and approach would help ensure narrative fiction's continued vitality. James wrote many valuable critical articles on other novelists; typical is his book-length study of Nathaniel Hawthorne, which has been the subject of critical debate. Richard Brodhead has suggested that the study was emblematic of James's struggle with Hawthorne's influence, and constituted an effort to place the elder writer "at a disadvantage." Gordon Fraser, meanwhile, has suggested that the study was part of a more commercial effort by James to introduce himself to British readers as Hawthorne's natural successor.
When James assembled the "New York Edition" of his fiction in his final years, he wrote a series of prefaces that subjected his own work to searching, occasionally harsh criticism.
For most of his life James harboured ambitions for success as a playwright. He converted his novel "The American" into a play that enjoyed modest returns in the early 1890s. In all he wrote about a dozen plays, most of which went unproduced. His costume drama "Guy Domville" failed disastrously on its opening night in 1895. James then largely abandoned his efforts to conquer the stage and returned to his fiction. In his "Notebooks" he maintained that his theatrical experiment benefited his novels and tales by helping him dramatise his characters' thoughts and emotions. James produced a small but valuable amount of theatrical criticism, including perceptive appreciations of Henrik Ibsen.
With his wide-ranging artistic interests, James occasionally wrote on the visual arts. Perhaps his most valuable contribution was his favourable assessment of fellow expatriate John Singer Sargent, a painter whose critical status has improved markedly in recent decades. James also wrote sometimes charming, sometimes brooding articles about various places he visited and lived in. His most famous books of travel writing include "Italian Hours" (an example of the charming approach) and "The American Scene" (most definitely on the brooding side).
James was one of the great letter-writers of any era. More than ten thousand of his personal letters are extant, and over three thousand have been published in a large number of collections. A complete edition of James's letters began publication in 2006, edited by Pierre Walker and Greg Zacharias. As of 2014, eight volumes have been published, covering the period from 1855 to 1880. James's correspondents included celebrated contemporaries like Robert Louis Stevenson, Edith Wharton and Joseph Conrad, along with many others in his wide circle of friends and acquaintances. The letters range from the "mere twaddle of graciousness" to serious discussions of artistic, social and personal issues.
Very late in life James began a series of autobiographical works: "A Small Boy and Others", "Notes of a Son and Brother", and the unfinished "The Middle Years". These books portray the development of a classic observer who was passionately interested in artistic creation but was somewhat reticent about participating fully in the life around him.
Henry James was only 22 when he wrote "The Noble School of Fiction" for "The Nation"'s first issue in 1865. He wrote, in all, over 200 essays and book, art, and theatre reviews for the magazine.
Reception.
Criticism, biographies and fictional treatments.
James's work has remained steadily popular with the limited audience of educated readers to whom he spoke during his lifetime, and has remained firmly in the canon, but, after his death, some American critics, such as Van Wyck Brooks, expressed hostility towards James for his long expatriation and eventual naturalisation as a British subject. Other critics such as E. M. Forster complained about what they saw as James's squeamishness in the treatment of sex and other possibly controversial material, or dismissed his style as difficult and obscure, relying heavily on extremely long sentences and excessively latinate language. Similarly Oscar Wilde criticised him for writing "fiction as if it were a painful duty". Vernon Parrington, composing a canon of American literature, condemned James for having cut himself off from America. Jorge Luis Borges wrote about him, "Despite the scruples and delicate complexities of James his work suffers from a major defect: the absence of life." And Virginia Woolf, writing to Lytton Strachey, asked, "Please tell me what you find in Henry James. ... we have his works here, and I read, and I can't find anything but faintly tinged rose water, urbane and sleek, but vulgar and pale as Walter Lamb. Is there really any sense in it?" Colm Tóibín observed that James "never really wrote about the English very well. His English characters don’t work for me."
Despite these criticisms, James is now valued for his psychological and moral realism, his masterful creation of character, his low-key but playful humour, and his assured command of the language. In his 1983 book, "The Novels of Henry James", Edward Wagenknecht offers an assessment that echoes Theodora Bosanquet's:
William Dean Howells saw James as a representative of a new realist school of literary art which broke with the English romantic tradition epitomised by the works of Charles Dickens and William Makepeace Thackeray. Howells wrote that realism found "its chief exemplar in Mr. James... A novelist he is not, after the old fashion, or after any fashion but his own."
Henry James in fiction.
Henry James has been the subject of a number of novels and stories, including the following:
David Lodge also wrote a long essay about writing about Henry James in his collection "The Year of Henry James: The Story of a Novel".
Notes.
^James was also an eager poet - his peak after his famous failure "Guy Domville" in which supposedly many poems were written(F.W.Dupee), most revolving around negative connotations (possibly due to his state of depression following abject failure of his premièr play on its opening night of 1895) like death, darkness etc. Sadly most of these have been lost, but his more popular works such as 'In the darkness' and 'death bejewel'd' have remained.

</doc>
<doc id="83121" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83121" title="Thaumas">
Thaumas

In Greek mythology, Thaumas (; Θαύμας; "gen".: Θαύμαντος; folk etymology "wonder") was a sea god, son of Pontus and Gaia. He married an Oceanid, Electra (or Ozomene). The children of Thaumas and Electra were the Harpies and Iris, the goddess of rainbows and a messenger of the gods; according to some, also Arke.
Poseidon overthrew him and became the new sea god.
Thaumas was also the name of a centaur.

</doc>
<doc id="83123" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83123" title="Asterope">
Asterope

Asterope can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83124" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83124" title="Black dwarf">
Black dwarf

A black dwarf is a theoretical stellar remnant, specifically a white dwarf that has cooled sufficiently that it no longer emits significant heat or light. Because the time required for a white dwarf to reach this state is calculated to be longer than the current age of the universe (13.8 billion years), no black dwarfs are expected to exist in the universe yet, and the temperature of the coolest white dwarfs is one observational limit on the age of the universe. A white dwarf is what remains of a main-sequence star of low or medium mass (below approximately 9 to 10 solar masses ()) after it has either expelled or fused all the elements for which it has sufficient temperature to fuse. What is left is then a dense sphere of electron-degenerate matter that cools slowly by thermal radiation, eventually becoming a black dwarf. If black dwarfs were to exist, they would be extremely difficult to detect, because, by definition, they would emit very little radiation. They would, however, be detectable through their gravitational influence.
Various white dwarfs cooled below 3900 K (M0 spectral class) have been found recently by astronomers using MDM Observatory's 2.4-meter telescope. They are estimated to be 11 to 12 billion years old.
Because the far-future evolution of stars depends on physical questions which are poorly understood, such as the nature of dark matter and the possibility and rate of proton decay, it is not known precisely how long it will take white dwarfs to cool to blackness., § IIIE, IVA. Barrow and Tipler estimate that it would take 1015 years for a white dwarf to cool to 5 K; however, if weakly interacting massive particles exist, it is possible that interactions with these particles will keep some white dwarfs much warmer than this for approximately 1025 years., § IIIE. If protons are not stable, white dwarfs will also be kept warm by energy released from proton decay. For a hypothetical proton lifetime of 1037 years, Adams and Laughlin calculate that proton decay will raise the effective surface temperature of an old one-solar-mass white dwarf to approximately 0.06 K. Although cold, this is thought to be hotter than the cosmic background radiation temperature 1037 years in the future., §IVB.
The name "black dwarf" has also been applied to substellar objects that do not have sufficient mass, less than approximately 0.08 , to maintain hydrogen-burning nuclear fusion. These objects are now generally called "brown dwarfs", a term coined in the 1970s. Black dwarfs should not be confused with black holes or neutron stars.
Surface and atmosphere.
A black dwarf would have a mainly smooth surface due to the black dwarf's high gravity with very few irregularities (such as mountains). The surface would also be dry with no surface volatiles such as water. The atmosphere of the black dwarf would consist mainly of carbon, and would contain no clouds or weather system due to thinness of the atmosphere.
Future of the Sun.
Once the Sun stops fusing helium in its core and ejects its layers in a planetary nebula in about 5 billion years, it will become a white dwarf and, over billions of years' time, eventually will no longer emit any light. After that, the Sun will not be visible to the equivalent of the naked human eye, removing it from optical view even if the gravitational effects are evident. The estimated time for the Sun to cool enough to become a black dwarf is about 1015 (1 quadrillion) years, though it could take much longer than this, if weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) exist.

</doc>
<doc id="83125" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83125" title="Iodame">
Iodame

In Greek mythology, Iodame was the daughter of Itonus and granddaughter of Amphictyon. She was a priestess at the temple of Athena Itonia built by her father. One night, Athena appeared in front of her; at the sight of Medusa's head which was worked in the goddess' garment, Iodame turned into stone. Since then, a priestess lit the fire on the altar every day, repeating thrice: "Iodame lives and demands fire".
An alternate story of Athena and Iodame is found in the "Etymologicum Magnum". According to it, both Iodame and Athena were daughters of Itonus. They became jealous of each other and started fighting, which resulted in Iodame being killed by Athena. The story is similar to that of Athena and Pallas (daughter of Triton).
According to John Tzetzes, Iodame became mother of Thebe with Zeus.

</doc>
<doc id="83126" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83126" title="Ogyges">
Ogyges

Ogyges, also spelled Ogygos or Ogygus ( or Ὤγυγος), is a primeval mythological ruler in ancient Greece, generally of Boeotia, but an alternative tradition makes him the first king of Attica.
Etymology.
Though the original etymology and meaning are "uncertain", the name "Ogyges" may be related with the Greek Okeanos (Ὠκεανός), the Titan who personified the great world ocean. The Greek word "Ogygios" (Ὠγύγιος), meaning "Ogygian", came to mean "primeval, primal," or "from earliest ages" and also "gigantic".
Ancient sources.
Ogyges is also known as king of the Ectenes, who according to Pausanias were the first inhabitants of Boeotia, where the city of Thebes would later be founded. As such, he became the first ruler of Thebes, which was, in that early time, named "Ogygia" (Ὠγυγία) after him. Subsequently, poets referred to the Thebans as "Ogygidae" (Ὠγυγίδαι). Pausanias, writing from his travels in Boeotia in the 2nd century CE, said: "The first to occupy the land of Thebes are said to have been the Ectenes, whose king was Ogygus, an aboriginal. From his name is derived Ogygian, which is an epithet of Thebes used by most of the poets."
In yet another version of the story, the Boeotian tradition is combined with that of another part of Greece: Ogyges was king of the Ectenes, who were the first people to occupy Boeotia, but he and his people later settled the area then known as Acte ("Akte"). The land was subsequently called Ogygia in his honor but later known as Mount Athos. Sextus Julius Africanus, writing after 221 CE, adds that Ogyges founded Eleusis.
Stories of his descent also differ widely. Besides Ogyges being one of the aborigines of Boeotia, there are tales that regard him as the son of Poseidon, Boeotus or even Cadmus. Theophilus, in the 2nd century ("Apologia ad Autolycum"), says he was one of the Titans.
He was the husband of Thebe, from whom the land of Thebes in Greece is said to derive its name. His children are listed variously as two sons: Eleusinus (for whom the city Eleusis was named) and Cadmus (noted above as his father in other traditions); and three daughters: Aulis, Alalcomenia, and Thelvinia.
According to Africanus, he lived at the time of the Exodus of the House of Israel from Egypt.
Ogyges is possibly the namesake for the phantom island Ogygia, mentioned in Homer's Odyssey. Another possibility for the island is the Niobid named Ogygia.
The historian Josephus mentions Ogyges as the name of the oak by which the Hebrew patriarch Abram dwelt while he lived near Hebron.
The deluge of Ogyges.
The first worldwide flood in Greek mythology, the Ogygian deluge occurred during his reign and derives its name from him, though some sources regard it as a local flood, such as an inundation of Lake Copais, a large lake once in the center of Boeotia. Other sources see it as a flood associated with Attica. This latter view was accepted by Africanus, who says "that great and first flood occurred in Attica, when Phoroneus was king of Argos, as Acusilaus relates."
When this deluge has been considered global, a similarity is noticed with Noah's flood in the Bible. Various dates have been assigned to the event, including 9500 BCE (Plato), 2136 BCE (Varro), and 1793 BCE (Africanus).
Ogyges survived the deluge but many people perished. After his death, the devastated Attica was without kings for 189 years, until the time of Cecrops (Cecrops Diphyes). Africanus says, "But after Ogyges, on account of the great destruction caused by the flood, what is now called Attica remained without a king one hundred and eighty-nine years until the time of Cecrops. For Philochorus asserts that that Actaeon who comes after Ogyges, and the fictitious names, never even existed."
It seems the deluge of Deucalion of Greek-mythology is the Greek version of the older legend. Deucalion and Pyrrha were the only survivals after the great deluge. His son Hellen who became ruler of Phthia in southern Thessaly was the patriarch of Hellenes.

</doc>
<doc id="83127" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83127" title="Aulis">
Aulis

Aulis may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83128" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83128" title="Georg Mohr">
Georg Mohr

Jørgen Mohr (Latinised "Georg(ius) Mohr"; 1 April 1640 – 26 January 1697) was a Danish mathematician, known for being the first to prove the Mohr–Mascheroni theorem, which states that any geometric construction which can be done with compass and straightedge can also be done with compasses alone.
Biography.
Mohr was born in Copenhagen, the son of a tradesman named David Mohrendal. Beginning in 1662 he traveled to the Netherlands, to study mathematics with Christiaan Huygens. In 1672 he published his first book, "Euclides Danicus", simultaneously in Copenhagen and Amsterdam, in Danish and Dutch respectively. This book, proving the Mohr–Mascheroni theorem 125 years earlier than Lorenzo Mascheroni, would languish in obscurity until its rediscovery in 1928. Mohr served in Franco-Dutch War in 1672–1673, and was taken prisoner by the French. By 1673, he had published his second book, "Compendium Euclidis Curiosi". A third book was later mentioned by Mohr's son; for many years this was believed to be the "Gegenübung auf Compendium Euclidis Curiosi" but argue that it must be a different book, and that the "Gegenübung" has a different author. As well as his work on geometry, Mohr contributed to the theory of nested radicals, with the aim of simplifying Cardano's formula for the roots of a cubic polynomial.
While in the Netherlands, Mohr became a friend of Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus. The two visited Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in France and John Collins in England together. Mohr returned to Denmark in 1681; he had dedicated "Euclides Danicus" to Christian V and hoped for a position in exchange, but was offered only a position as a shipyard supervisor, which he declined. He married Elizabeth von der Linde of Copenhagen on July 19, 1687, and soon after returned to Holland; their son, Peter Georg Mohrenthal, eventually settled in Dresden as a bookseller and publisher. In 1695 he took a job with Tschirnhaus, and spent his last few years as a guest in Tschirnhaus's house. He died in Kieslingswalde near Görlitz, Germany.
The Danish Mathematics competition is named in honour of Mohr.

</doc>
<doc id="83129" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83129" title="Theia">
Theia

In Greek mythology, Theia (sometimes rendered Thea, "Théa or Thia), also called Euryphaessa"' "wide-shining", is a Titaness. The name "Theia" alone means simply "goddess" or "divine"; "Theia Euryphaessa" () brings overtones of extent (, "eurys", "wide", root: ) and brightness (, "phaos", "light", root: φαεσ-). Her brother/consort is Hyperion, a Titan and god of the sun, and together they are the parents of Helios (the Sun), Selene (the Moon), and Eos (the Dawn).
Earlier myths.
Hesiod's "Theogony" gives her an equally primal origin, a daughter of Gaia (Earth) and Uranus (Sky). Robert Graves also relates that later Theia is referred to as the "cow-eyed Euryphaessa" who gave birth to Helios in myths dating to Classical Antiquity.
Later myths.
Once paired in later myths with her Titan brother Hyperion as her husband, "mild-eyed Euryphaessa, the far-shining one" of the Homeric Hymn to Helios, was said to be the mother of Helios (the Sun), Selene (the Moon), and Eos (the Dawn). 
Pindar praises Theia in his Fifth Isthmian ode:
She seems here a goddess of glittering in particular and of glory in general, but Pindar's allusion to her as "Theia of many names" is telling, since it suggests assimilation, referring not only to similar mother-of-the-sun goddesses such as Phoebe and Leto, but perhaps also to more universalizing mother-figures such as Rhea and Cybele.
Theia in the sciences.
Theia's mythological role as the mother of the Moon goddess Selene is alluded to in the application of the name to a hypothetical planet which, according to the giant impact hypothesis, collided with the Earth, resulting in the Moon's creation.
Theia's alternate name "Euryphaessa" has been adopted for a species of Australian leafhoppers "Dayus euryphaessa" (Kirkaldy, 1907).

</doc>
<doc id="83130" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83130" title="Thea">
Thea

Thea may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83131" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83131" title="Thriae">
Thriae

The Thriae or Thriai were nymphs, three virginal sisters, one of a number of such triads ("maiden trinities" Jane Ellen Harrison called them) in Greek mythology. They received names Melaina ("The Black"), Kleodora ("Famed for her Gift"), and Daphnis ("Laurel"); however, in the page in the Corycian nymphs, the third sister is listed as Corycia. They were the three Naiads (nymphs) of the sacred springs of the Corycian Cave of Mount Parnassus in Phocis.
Corycia was the sister whom the Corycian Cave was named after. She was the mother of Lycoreus with Apollo.
Kleodora was loved by Poseidon. With Poseidon (or Kleopompos) she was the mother of Parnassos, who founded the city of Parnassus. (Pausanias 10.6.13).
Melaina was loved by Apollo, bearing him Delphos. Another tradition names Thyia as the mother of Delphos. Her name meant "the black," suggesting she presides over subterranean nymphs.

</doc>
<doc id="83133" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83133" title="Thyrsus">
Thyrsus

A thyrsus or thyrsos () was a wand or staff of giant fennel ("Ferula communis") covered with ivy vines and leaves, sometimes wound with taeniae and always topped with a pine cone.
Symbolism.
The thyrsus, associated with Dionysus (or Bacchus) and his followers, the Satyrs and Maenads, is a symbol of prosperity, fertility, hedonism, and pleasure/enjoyment in general. It has been suggested that this was specifically a fertility phallus, with the fennel representing the shaft of the penis and the pine cone representing the "seed" issuing forth. The thyrsus was tossed in the Bacchic dance:
"Pentheus": The thyrsus— in my right hand shall I hold it?
"Dionysus": In thy right hand, and with thy right foot raise it".
Sometimes the thyrsus was displayed in conjunction with a kantharos wine cup, another symbol of Dionysus, forming a male-and-female combination like that of the royal scepter and orb.
Use.
In Greek religion, the staff was carried by the votaries of Dionysus. Euripides wrote that honey dripped from the thyrsos staves that the Bacchic maenads carried. The thyrsus was a sacred instrument at religious rituals and fêtes.
The fabulous history of Bacchus relates that he converted the thyrsi carried by himself and his followers into dangerous weapons, by concealing an iron point in the head of leaves. Hence his thyrsus is called "a spear enveloped in vine-leaves", and its point was thought to incite to madness.
Literature.
In the "Iliad", Diomedes, one of the leading warriors of the Achaeans, mentions the thyrsus while speaking to Glaucus, one of the Lycian commanders in the Trojan army, about Lycurgus, the king of Scyros:
He it was that/drove the nursing women who were in charge/of frenzied Bacchus through the land of Nysa,/and they flung their thyrsi on the ground as/murderous Lycurgus beat them with his ox-/goad. ("Iliad", Book VI.132-37)
The thyrsus is explicitly attributed to Dionysus in Euripides's play "The Bacchae" as part of the costume of the Dionysian cult. ...To raise my Bacchic shout, and clothe all who respond/ In fawnskin habits, and put my thyrsus in their hands–/ The weapon wreathed with ivy-shoots..." Euripides also writes, "There's a brute wildness in the fennel-wands—Reverence it well." ("The Bacchae and Other Plays", trans. by Philip Vellacott, Penguin, 1954.)
Plato writes in "Phaedo":
I conceive that the founders of the mysteries had a real meaning and were not mere triflers when they intimated in a figure long ago that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated into the world below will live in a slough, but that he who arrives there after initiation and purification will dwell with the gods. For "many," as they say in the mysteries, "are the thyrsus bearers, but few are the mystics,"--meaning, as I interpret the words, the true philosophers.
In Part II of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's "Faust", Mephistopheles tries to catch a Lamia, only to find out that she is an illusion:
Well, then, a tall one I will catch.../And now a thyrsus-pole I snatch!/Only a pine-cone as its head. (7775-7777)
Robert Browning mentions the thyrsus in passing in "The Bishop Orders His Tomb at St Praxed's Church", as the dying bishop confuses Christian piety with classical extravagance:
Ovid talks about Bacchus carrying a thyrsus and his followers doing the same in his Metamorphoses Book III, which is a retelling of The Bacchae.
The bas-relief in bronze ye promised me,/Those Pans and nymphs ye wot of, and perchance/Some tripod, thrysus, with a vase or so, (56-58)

</doc>
<doc id="83134" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83134" title="Zalmoxis">
Zalmoxis

Zalmoxis () 
is a divinity of the Getae (a people of the lower Danube), mentioned by Herodotus in his "Histories" IV, 93–96.
In later interpretations, which began with Jordanes (6th century AC) and proliferated during the 19th and 20th century, mainly in Romania (where it is known by the name of "Zamolxis"), he was regarded as the sole god of the Getae or as a legendary social and religious reformer who, according to Herodotus, taught the Getae a belief in immortality, so that they considered dying merely as going to Zalmoxis. Herodotus states that Zalmoxis was also called by some of the Getae "Gebeleizis", which led some researchers to conclude that Getae were actually henotheists or even polytheists. Another discussion exists about the chthonic (infernal) or uranian (heavenly) character of Zalmoxis.
Herodotus.
Herodotus writes about Zalmoxis in book 4 of his "Histories":
93. ...the Getae are the bravest of the Thracians and the most just. 
94. They believe they are immortal in the following sense: they think they do not die and that the one who dies joins Zalmoxis, a divine being; some call this same divine being Gebeleizis. Every four years, they send a messenger to Zalmoxis, who is chosen by chance. They ask him to tell Zalmoxis what they want on that occasion. The mission is performed in the following way: men standing there for that purpose hold three spears; other people take the one who is sent to Zalmoxis by his hands and feet and fling him in the air on the spears. If he dies pierced, they think that the divinity is going to help them; if he does not die, it is he who is accused and they declare that he is a bad person. And, after he has been charged, they send another one. The messenger is told the requests while he is still alive. The same Thracians, on other occasions, when he thunders and lightens, shoot with arrows up in the air against the sky and menace the divinity because they think there is no god other than their own. 
Herodotus asserts that Zalmoxis was originally a human being, a slave who converted the Thracians to his beliefs. The Greeks of the Hellespont and the Black Sea tell that Zalmoxis was a slave of Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchos, on the island of Samos. After being liberated, he gathered huge wealth and, once rich, went back to his homeland. Thracians lived simple hard lives. Zalmoxis had lived among the wisest of Greeks, such as Pythagoras, and had been initiated into Ionian life and the Eleusinian Mysteries. He built a banquet hall, and received the chiefs and his fellow countrymen at a banquet He taught that neither his guests nor their descendants would ever die, but instead would go to a place where they would live forever in a complete happiness. He then dug an underground residence. When it was finished, he disappeared from Thrace, living for three years in his underground residence. The Thracians missed him and wept fearing him dead. The fourth year, he came back among them and thus they believed what Zalmoxis had told them.
Zalmoxis may have lived much earlier than Pythagoras and was rumored either to be a divine being or from the country of the Getae.
Scholars have several different theories about this account by Herodotus the disappearance and return of Zalmoxis.
This last theory precisely parallels the legend of the universal king Frode given in both "Ynglingsaga" and "Gesta Danorum" of Saxo Grammaticus; particularly, "Ynglingsaga" 12 and Saxo 5.16.3, in which Frode disappears into the earth for three years after his death.
It is difficult to define the time when a cult to Zalmoxis may have existed. It is only certain that it antecedes Herodotus. Some scholars have suggested that the archaic doctrine of Zalmoxis points to a heritage from before the times of Indo-Europeans, but this is quite difficult, if not impossible, to demonstrate.
Plato says in the dialogue "Charmides" (lines 156 D – 157 B) that Zalmoxis was also a great physician who took a holistic approach to healing body and soul (psyche), being thus used by Plato for his own philosophical conceptions.
Religion of the Getae.
Strabo in his "Geography" mentions a certain Deceneus (Dékainéos) whom he calls a γόητα "magician". According to Strabo, king Burebista (82–44 BC) hired Deceneus, who had been in Egypt, to "tame" his people. As a sign of the people's obedience, they consented to destroy all their wines as ordered by Deceneus. The "reform of Deceneus" is the interpretation by the 6th century bishop and historian Jordanes, who includes the Getae in his history of the Goths (as assumed ancestors of the Goths). Jordanes describes how Deceneus taught the Getae philosophy and physics. Even if it is far more probable that Jordanes just introduced his own philosophical knowledge in the text, many modern Romanian authors consider that Deceneus was a priest who reformed the Getae religion, changing worship of Zalmoxis into a popular religion and imposing strict religious rules, such as the restriction of wine consumption. Jean Coman deems this prohibition as the origin of the dietary restrictions followed by the modern Orthodox Church during Lent.
Iamblichus (280-333 AD): "For instructing the Getae in these things, and for having written laws for them, Zalmoxis was by them considered as the greatest of the gods."
Aristotle is said, in a brief epitome of his Magicus given by Diogenes Laertes, to have compared Zalmoxis with the Phoenician "Okhon" and Libyan "Atlas". Some authors assume Zalmoxis was another name of Sabazius, the Thracian Dionysus, or Zeus. Sabazius appears in Jordanes as Gebelezis. Without the suffixes -zius/-zis, the root Saba- = Gebele-, suggesting a relationship of the name of the goddess Cybele, as "Cybele's Zeus". Mnaseas of Patrae identified him with Cronos. Hesychius also has .
In Plato's writings, Zalmoxis is mentioned as skilled in the arts of incantation. Zalmoxis gave his name to a particular type of singing and dancing (Hesych) His realm as a god is not very clear, as some considered him to be a sky-god, a god of the dead, or a god of the Mysteries.
Lactantius (an early Christian author, c. 240–320 AD), referring to the religion of the Getae, provides an approximate translation of Julian the Apostate's purported quotation of Trajan:
We have conquered even these Getai (Dacians), the most warlike of all people that have ever existed, not only because of the strength in their bodies, but, also due to the teachings of Zalmoxis who is among their most hailed. He has told them that in their hearts they do not die, but change their location and, due to this, they go to their deaths happier than on any other journey."
Zalmoxian religion.
The "Zalmoxian religion" is the subject of a scholarly debate that has continued since the beginning of the 20th century. Participants have included Nicolae Densușianu, Vasile Pârvan, Giurescu (father and son), Jean (Ioan) Coman, Constantin Daicoviciu, and Mircea Eliade. The most complete summary of the debate, which has often taken a political or religious turn, is Dan Dana's "Zalmoxis de la Herodot la Mircea Eliade. Istorii despre un zeu al pretextului" (Iași, 2008), a work partly published only in French and not translated into English.
According to some scholars, such as Vasile Pârvan, Jean Coman, R. Pettazzon, E. Rohde and Sorin Paliga, since ancient sources do not mention any god of the Getae other than Zalmoxis, the Getae were monotheistic. However, Herodotus is the only ancient author who explicitly states that the Getae had only one divinity. The sending of a messenger to Zalmoxis and the fact that Getae shot arrows towards the sky have prompted some authors to believe Zalmoxis was a sky god, but his journey into a cavern has led others to suggest that he was a chthonic divinity.
Other scholars argue that the Zalmoxian religion was henotheistic, that is, that Zalmoxis was the supreme god, but there were also minor divinities closely associated with him.
A third group of scholars believe that the Getae, like other Indo-European peoples, were polytheistic. They draw on ancient authors such as Diodorus Siculus, who states that the Getae worshipped Hestia as well as Zalmoxis.
In fact, not all the ancient sources depict Zalmoxis as a god, while Jordanes Iamblichus (in his "Life of Pythagoras") says that Zalmoxis was a man who became a god.
Some researchers at the beginning of the Communist era in Romania argued that the Getae were atheists, as in the case of Constantin Balmuș in his short article "O apreciere a lui Herodot asupra geţilor".
There have also been discussions about Herodotus' statement that the Getae "think that they do not really die, but that when they depart this life they go to Zalmoxis". Romanian Orthodox authors such as Jean Coman considered this to be evidence that the Daco-Getae had a proto-Christian belief and that, with the Christianisation of Romania, they were easily able to accept the Christian faith. This idea appears in Mircea Păcurariu's history of the Romanian Orthodox Church, which is deemed authoritative by that Church.
Mircea Eliade concluded in his book "From Zalmoxis to Genghis Khan" (1970) that the Getae had a religion based on a rite of passage, in which ritual death was symbolized by disappearance into a cavern and was followed by ritual rebirth, symbolized by the leaving of the cavern.
Etymology.
A number of etymologies have been given for the name. In his "Vita Pythagorae", Porphyrius (3rd century) says that he was so named because he had been wrapped in a bearskin at birth, and "zalmon" is the Thracian word for "hide" (). Hesychius (ca. 5th century) has "zemelen" (ζέμελεν) as a Phrygian word for "foreign slave".
The correct spelling of the name is also uncertain. Manuscripts of Herodotus' "Historiae" have all four spellings, viz. "Zalmoxis", "Salmoxis", "Zamolxis", "Samolxis", with a majority of manuscripts favouring "Salmoxis". Later authors show a preference for "Zamolxis". Hesychius quotes Herodotus, using "Zalmoxis".
The "-m-l-" variant is favoured by those wishing to derive the name from a conjectured Thracian word for "earth", "*zamol". Comparisons have also been made with the name of Zemelo and Žemelė, the Phrygian and Lithuanian goddess of the earth, and with the Lithuanian chthonic god Žemeliūkštis. The Lithuanian word "Žalmuo" means "corn shoot" or "fresh grass". "Žalmokšnis' is another possible form of it.
The "-l-m-" variant is admitted to be the older form and the correct form by the majority of Thracologists, as this is the form found in the older Herodotus manuscripts and other ancient sources. The "-l-m-" form is further attested in Daco-Thracian in "Zalmodegikos", the name of a Getic King; and in Thracian "zalmon", 'hide', and "zelmis", 'hide' (PIE "*kel-", 'to cover'; cf. English "helm").
The other name for Zalmoxis, Gebeleizis, is also spelled Belaizis and Belaixis in Herodotus manuscripts.
Since the Getae-Dacian religious system was monotheistic aniconism centered around the god Zalmoxis, it is less likely that the believers in his resurrection would use a name meaning "hide" / "foreign slave", as the hostile ancient Greek non-believers related about him.
In popular culture.
The Romanian rock band Sfinx worked from around 1975 through 1978 on "Zalmoxe", a progressive rock LP, with lyrics by poet Alexandru Basarab (actually a pen name for Adrian Hoajă), which retold the story of Zalmoxis.

</doc>
<doc id="83136" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83136" title="Zibelthiurdos">
Zibelthiurdos

Zibelthiurdos (Zibelthurdos or Zbelsurdos) was a Thracian god of storm and lightning like god Gebeleizis.

</doc>
<doc id="83137" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83137" title="Software-defined radio">
Software-defined radio

Software-defined radio (SDR) is a radio communication system where components that have been typically implemented in hardware (e.g. mixers, filters, amplifiers, modulators/demodulators, detectors, etc.) are instead implemented by means of software on a personal computer or embedded system. While the concept of SDR is not new, the rapidly evolving capabilities of digital electronics render practical many processes which used to be only theoretically possible.
Overview.
A basic SDR system may consist of a personal computer equipped with a sound card, or other analog-to-digital converter, preceded by some form of RF front end. Significant amounts of signal processing are handed over to the general-purpose processor, rather than being done in special-purpose hardware (electronic circuits). Such a design produces a radio which can receive and transmit widely different radio protocols (sometimes referred to as waveforms) based solely on the software used.
Software radios have significant utility for the military and cell phone services, both of which must serve a wide variety of changing radio protocols in real time.
In the long term, software-defined radios are expected by proponents like the SDRForum (now The Wireless Innovation Forum) to become the dominant technology in radio communications. SDRs, along with software defined antennas are the enablers of the cognitive radio.
A software-defined radio can be flexible enough to avoid the "limited spectrum" assumptions of designers of previous kinds of radios, in one or more ways including:
Operating principles.
Ideal concept.
The ideal receiver scheme would be to attach an analog-to-digital converter to an antenna. A digital signal processor would read the converter, and then its software would transform the stream of data from the converter to any other form the application requires.
An ideal transmitter would be similar. A digital signal processor would generate a stream of numbers. These would be sent to a digital-to-analog converter connected to a radio antenna.
The ideal scheme is not completely realizable due to the actual limits of the technology. The main problem in both directions is the difficulty of conversion between the digital and the analog domains at a high enough rate and a high enough accuracy at the same time, and without relying upon physical processes like interference and electromagnetic resonance for assistance.
Receiver architecture.
Most receivers use a variable-frequency oscillator, mixer, and filter to tune the desired signal to a common intermediate frequency or baseband, where it is then sampled by the analog-to-digital converter. However, in some applications it is not necessary to tune the signal to an intermediate frequency and the radio frequency signal is directly sampled by the analog-to-digital converter (after amplification).
Real analog-to-digital converters lack the dynamic range to pick up sub-microvolt, nanowatt-power radio signals. Therefore, a low-noise amplifier must precede the conversion step and this device introduces its own problems. For example, if spurious signals are present (which is typical), these compete with the desired signals within the amplifier's dynamic range. They may introduce distortion in the desired signals, or may block them completely. The standard solution is to put band-pass filters between the antenna and the amplifier, but these reduce the radio's flexibility. Real software radios often have two or three analog channel filters with different bandwidths that are switched in and out.
History.
The term "digital receiver" was coined in 1970 by a researcher at a United States Department of Defense laboratory. A laboratory called the Gold Room at TRW in California created a software baseband analysis tool called Midas, which had its operation defined in software.
The term "software radio" was coined in 1984 by a team at the Garland, Texas Division of E-Systems Inc. (now Raytheon) to refer to a digital baseband receiver and published in their E-Team company newsletter. A 'Software Radio Proof-of-Concept' laboratory was developed there that popularized Software Radio within various government agencies. This 1984 Software Radio was a digital baseband receiver that provided programmable interference cancellation and demodulation for broadband signals, typically with thousands of adaptive filter taps, using multiple array processors accessing shared memory.
In 1991, Joe Mitola independently reinvented the term software radio for a plan to build a GSM base station that would combine Ferdensi's digital receiver with E-Systems Melpar's digitally controlled communications jammers for a true software-based transceiver. E-Systems Melpar sold the software radio idea to the US Air Force. Melpar built a prototype commanders' tactical terminal in 1990-91 that employed Texas Instruments TMS320C30 processors and Harris digital receiver chip sets with digitally synthesized transmission. That prototype didn't last long because when E-Systems ECI Division manufactured the first limited production units, they decided to "throw out those useless C30 boards," replacing them with conventional RF filtering on transmit and receive, reverting to a digital baseband radio instead of the SPEAKeasy like IF ADC/DACs of Mitola's prototype. The Air Force would not let Mitola publish the technical details of that prototype, nor would they let Diane Wasserman publish related software life cycle lessons learned because they regarded it as a "USAF competitive advantage." So instead, with USAF permission, in 1991 Mitola described the architecture principles without implementation details in a paper, "Software Radio: Survey, Critical Analysis and Future Directions" which became the first IEEE publication to employ the term in 1992. When Mitola presented the paper at the conference, Bob Prill of GEC Marconi began his presentation following Mitola with "Joe is absolutely right about the theory of a software radio and we are building one." Prill gave a GEC Marconi paper on PAVE PILLAR, a SPEAKeasy precursor. SPEAKeasy, the military software radio was formulated by Wayne Bonser, then of Rome Air Development Center (RADC), now Rome Labs; by Alan Margulies of MITRE Rome, NY; and then Lt Beth Kaspar, the original DARPA SPEAKeasy project manager and by others at Rome including Don Upmal. Although Mitola's IEEE publications resulted in the largest global footprint for software radio, Mitola privately credits that DoD lab of the 1970s with its leaders Carl, Dave, and John with inventing the digital receiver technology on which he based software radio once it was possible to transmit via software.
A few months after the National Telesystems Conference 1992, in an E-Systems corporate program review, a vice-president of E-Systems Garland Division objected to Melpar's (Mitola's) use of the term "software radio" without credit to Garland. Alan Jackson, Melpar VP of marketing at that time asked the Garland VP if their laboratory or devices included transmitters. The Garland VP said "No, of course not — ours is a software radio receiver". Al replied "Then it's a digital receiver but without a transmitter, it's not a software radio." Corporate leadership agreed with Al, so the publication stood. Many amateur radio operators and HF radio engineers had realized the value of digitizing HF at RF and of processing it with Texas Instruments TI C30 digital signal processors (DSPs) and their precursors during the 1980s and early 1990s. Radio engineers at Roke Manor in the UK and at an organization in Germany had recognized the benefits of ADC at the RF in parallel, so success has many fathers. Mitola's publication of software radio in the IEEE opened the concept to the broad community of radio engineers. His landmark May 1995 special issue of the IEEE Communications Magazine with the cover "Software Radio" was widely regarded as watershed event with thousands of academic citations. Mitola was introduced by Joao da Silva in 1997 at the First International Conference on Software Radio as "godfather" of software radio in no small part for his willingness to share such a valuable technology "in the public interest."
Perhaps the first software-based radio transceiver was designed and implemented by Peter Hoeher and Helmuth Lang at the German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR, formerly DFVLR) in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany, in 1988. Both transmitter and receiver of an adaptive digital satellite modem were implemented according to the principles of a software radio, and a flexible hardware periphery was proposed.
The term "software defined radio" was coined in 1995 by Stephen Blust, who published a request for information from Bell South Wireless at the first meeting of the Modular Multifunction Information Transfer Systems (MMITS) forum in 1996, organized by the USAF and DARPA around the commercialization of their SPEAKeasy II program. Mitola objected to Blust's term, but finally accepted it as a pragmatic pathway towards the ideal software radio. Though the concept was first implemented with an IF ADC in the early 1990s, software-defined radios have their origins in the defense sector since the late 1970s in both the U.S. and Europe (for example, Walter Tuttlebee described a VLF radio that used an ADC and an 8085 microprocessor). about a year after the First International Conference in Brussels. One of the first public software radio initiatives was the U.S. DARPA-Air Force military project named SpeakEasy. The primary goal of the SpeakEasy project was to use programmable processing to emulate more than 10 existing military radios, operating in frequency bands between 2 and 2000 MHz. Another SPEAKeasy design goal was to be able to easily incorporate new coding and modulation standards in the future, so that military communications can keep pace with advances in coding and modulation techniques.
SPEAKeasy phase I.
From 1990 to 1995, the goal of the SPEAKeasy program was to demonstrate a radio for the U.S. Air Force tactical ground air control party that could operate from 2 MHz to 2 GHz, and thus could interoperate with ground force radios (frequency-agile VHF, FM, and SINCGARS), Air Force radios (VHF AM), Naval Radios (VHF AM and HF SSB teleprinters) and satellites (microwave QAM). Some particular goals were to provide a new signal format in two weeks from a standing start, and demonstrate a radio into which multiple contractors could plug parts and software.
The project was demonstrated at TF-XXI Advanced Warfighting Exercise, and demonstrated all of these goals in a non-production radio. There was some discontent with failure of these early software radios to adequately filter out of band emissions, to employ more than the simplest of interoperable modes of the existing radios, and to lose connectivity or crash unexpectedly. Its cryptographic processor could not change context fast enough to keep several radio conversations on the air at once. Its software architecture, though practical enough, bore no resemblance to any other. The SPEAKeasy architecture was refined at the MMITS Forum between 1996 and 1999 and inspired the DoD integrated process team (IPT) for programmable modular communications systems (PMCS) to proceed with what became the Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS).
The basic arrangement of the radio receiver used an antenna feeding an amplifier and down-converter (see Frequency mixer) feeding an automatic gain control, which fed an analog to digital converter that was on a computer VMEbus with a lot of digital signal processors (Texas Instruments C40s). The transmitter had digital to analog converters on the PCI bus feeding an up converter (mixer) that led to a power amplifier and antenna. The very wide frequency range was divided into a few sub-bands with different analog radio technologies feeding the same analog to digital converters. This has since become a standard design scheme for wide band software radios.
SPEAKeasy phase II.
The goal was to get a more quickly reconfigurable architecture, "i.e.", several conversations at once, in an "open" software architecture, with cross-channel connectivity (the radio can "bridge" different radio protocols). The secondary goals were to make it smaller, cheaper, and weigh less.
The project produced a demonstration radio only fifteen months into a three-year research project. The demonstration was so successful that further development was halted, and the radio went into production with only a 4 MHz to 400 MHz range.
The software architecture identified standard interfaces for different modules of the radio: "radio frequency control" to manage the analog parts of the radio, "modem control" managed resources for modulation and demodulation schemes (FM, AM, SSB, QAM, etc.), "waveform processing" modules actually performed the modem functions, "key processing" and "cryptographic processing" managed the cryptographic functions, a "multimedia" module did voice processing, a "human interface" provided local or remote controls, there was a "routing" module for network services, and a "control" module to keep it all straight.
The modules are said to communicate without a central operating system. Instead, they send messages over the PCI computer bus to each other with a layered protocol.
As a military project, the radio strongly distinguished "red" (unsecured secret data) and "black" (cryptographically-secured data).
The project was the first known to use FPGAs (field programmable gate arrays) for digital processing of radio data. The time to reprogram these was an issue limiting application of the radio. Today, the time to write a program for an FPGA is still significant, but the time to download a stored FPGA program is around 20 milliseconds. This means an SDR could change transmission protocols and frequencies in one fiftieth of a second, probably not an intolerable interruption for that task.
Current usage.
Military.
The Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) was a program of the US military to produce radios that provide flexible and interoperable communications. Examples of radio terminals that require support include hand-held, vehicular, airborne and dismounted radios, as well as base-stations (fixed and maritime).
This goal is achieved through the use of SDR systems based on an internationally endorsed open Software Communications Architecture (SCA). This standard uses CORBA on POSIX operating systems to coordinate various software modules.
The program is providing a flexible new approach to meet diverse soldier communications needs through software programmable radio technology. All functionality and expandability is built upon the SCA.
The SCA, despite its military origin, is under evaluation by commercial radio vendors for applicability in their domains. The adoption of general-purpose SDR frameworks outside of military, intelligence, experimental and amateur uses, however, is inherently hampered by the fact that civilian users can more easily settle with a fixed architecture, optimized for a specific function, and as such more economical in mass market applications. Still, software defined radio's inherent flexibility can yield substantial benefits in the longer run, once the fixed costs of implementing it have gone down enough to overtake the cost of iterated redesign of purpose built systems. This then explains the increasing commercial interest in the technology.
SCA-based infrastructure software and rapid development tools for SDR education and research are provided by the Open Source SCA Implementation Embedded (OSSIE) project. The Wireless Innovation Forum funded the SCA Reference Implementation project, an open source implementation of the SCA specification. (SCARI) can be downloaded for free.
Amateur and home use.
A typical amateur software radio uses a direct conversion receiver. Unlike direct conversion receivers of the more distant past, the mixer technologies used are based on the quadrature sampling detector and the quadrature sampling exciter.
The receiver performance of this line of SDRs is directly related to the dynamic range of the analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) utilized. Radio frequency signals are down converted to the audio frequency band, which is sampled by a high performance audio frequency ADC. First generation SDRs used a PC sound card to provide ADC functionality. The newer software defined radios use embedded high performance ADCs that provide higher dynamic range and are more resistant to noise and RF interference.
A fast PC performs the digital signal processing (DSP) operations using software specific for the radio hardware. Several software radio efforts use the open source SDR library DttSP.
The SDR software performs all of the demodulation, filtering (both radio frequency and audio frequency), and signal enhancement (equalization and binaural presentation). Uses include every common amateur modulation: morse code, single sideband modulation, frequency modulation, amplitude modulation, and a variety of digital modes such as radioteletype, slow-scan television, and packet radio. Amateurs also experiment with new modulation methods: for instance, the DREAM open-source project decodes the COFDM technique used by Digital Radio Mondiale.
There is a broad range of hardware solutions for radio amateurs and home use. There are professional-grade transceiver solutions, e.g. the Zeus ZS-1 or the Flex Radio, home-brew solutions,e.g. PicAStar transceiver, the SoftRock SDR kit, and starter or professional receiver solutions, e.g. the FiFi SDR for shortwave, or the Quadrus coherent multi-channel SDR receiver for short wave or VHF/UHF in direct digital mode of operation.
It has been discovered that some common low-cost DVB-T USB dongles with the Realtek RTL2832U controller and tuner, e.g. the Elonics E4000 or the Rafael Micro R820T, can be used as a wide-band SDR receiver. Recent experiments have proven the capability of this setup to analyze perseids shower using the graves radar signals.
More recently, the GNU Radio using primarily the Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) uses a USB 2.0 interface, an FPGA, and a high-speed set of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, combined with reconfigurable free software. Its sampling and synthesis bandwidth is a thousand times that of PC sound cards, which enables wideband operation.
The HPSDR (High Performance Software Defined Radio) project uses a 16-bit analog-to-digital converter that provides performance over the range 0 to comparable to that of a conventional analogue HF radio. The receiver will also operate in the VHF and UHF range using either mixer image or alias responses. Interface to a PC is provided by a USB 2.0 interface though Ethernet could be used as well. The project is modular and comprises a backplane onto which other boards plug in. This allows experimentation with new techniques and devices without the need to replace the entire set of boards. An exciter provides of RF over the same range or into the VHF and UHF range using image or alias outputs.
WebSDR is a project initiated by Pieter-Tjerk de Boer providing access via browser to multiple SDR receivers worldwide covering the complete shortwave spectrum. Recently he has analyzed Chirp Transmitter signals using the coupled system of receivers.

</doc>
<doc id="83139" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83139" title="Intermediate frequency">
Intermediate frequency

In communications and electronic engineering, an intermediate frequency (IF) is a frequency to which a carrier wave is shifted as an intermediate step in transmission or reception. The intermediate frequency is created by mixing the carrier signal with a local oscillator signal in a process called heterodyning, resulting in a signal at the difference or beat frequency. Intermediate frequencies are used in superheterodyne radio receivers, in which an incoming signal is shifted to an IF for amplification before final detection is done.
Conversion to an intermediate frequency is useful for several reasons. When several stages of filters are used, they can all be set to a fixed frequency, which makes them easier to build and to tune. Lower frequency transistors generally have higher gains so fewer stages are required. It's easier to make sharply selective filters at lower fixed frequencies.
There may be several such stages of intermediate frequency in a superheterodyne receiver; two or three stages are called "double" or "triple" "conversion", respectively.
Reasons for using IF.
Intermediate frequencies are used for three general reasons. At very high (gigahertz) frequencies, signal processing circuitry performs poorly. Active devices such as transistors cannot deliver much amplification (gain). Ordinary circuits using capacitors and inductors must be replaced with cumbersome high frequency techniques such as striplines and waveguides. So a high frequency signal is converted to a lower IF for more convenient processing. For example, in satellite dishes, the microwave downlink signal received by the dish is converted to a much lower IF at the dish, to allow a relatively inexpensive coaxial cable to carry the signal to the receiver inside the building. Bringing the signal in at the original microwave frequency would require an expensive waveguide.
A second reason, in receivers that can be tuned to different frequencies, is to convert the various different frequencies of the stations to a common frequency for processing. It is difficult to build multistage amplifiers, filters, and detectors that can have all stages track in tuning different frequencies, but it is comparatively easy to build tunable oscillators. Superheterodyne receivers tune in different frequencies by adjusting the frequency of the local oscillator on the input stage, and all processing after that is done at the same fixed frequency, the IF. Without using an IF, all the complicated filters and detectors in a radio or television would have to be tuned in unison each time the frequency was changed, as was necessary in the early tuned radio frequency receivers.
The main reason for using an intermediate frequency is to improve frequency selectivity. In communication circuits, a very common task is to separate out or extract signals or components of a signal that are close together in frequency. This is called filtering. Some examples are, picking up a radio station among several that are close in frequency, or extracting the chrominance subcarrier from a TV signal. With all known filtering techniques the filter's bandwidth increases proportionately with the frequency. So a narrower bandwidth and more selectivity can be achieved by converting the signal to a lower IF and performing the filtering at that frequency. FM and television broadcasting with their narrow channel widths, as well as more modern telecommunications services such as cell phones and cable television, would be impossible without using frequency conversion.
Uses.
Perhaps the most commonly used intermediate frequencies for broadcast receivers are around 455 kHz for AM receivers and 10.7 MHz for FM receivers. In special purpose receivers other frequencies can be used. A dual-conversion receiver may have two intermediate frequencies, a higher one to improve image rejection and a second, lower one, for desired selectivity. A first intermediate frequency may even be higher than the input signal, so that all undesired responses can be easily filtered out by a fixed-tuned RF stage.
In a digital receiver, the analog to digital converter (ADC) operates at low sampling rates, so input RF must be mixed down to IF to be processed. Intermediate frequency tends to be lower frequency range compared to the transmitted RF frequency. However, the choices for the IF are most dependent on the available components such as mixer, filters, amplifiers and others that can operate at lower frequency. There are other factors involved in deciding the IF frequency, because lower IF is susceptible to noise and higher IF can cause clock jitters.
Modern satellite television receivers use several intermediate frequencies. The 500 television channels of a typical system are transmitted from the satellite to subscribers in the Ku microwave band, in two subbands of 10.7 - 11.7 and 11.7 - 12.75 GHz. The downlink signal is received by a satellite dish. In the box at the focus of the dish, called a low-noise block downconverter (LNB), each block of frequencies is converted to the IF range of 950 - 2150 MHz by two fixed frequency local oscillators at 9.75 and 10.6 GHz. One of the two blocks is selected by a control signal from the set top box inside, which switches on one of the local oscillators. This IF is carried into the building to the television receiver on a coaxial cable. At the cable company's set top box, the signal is converted to a lower IF of 480 MHz for filtering, by a variable frequency oscillator. This is sent through a 30 MHz bandpass filter, which selects the signal from one of the transponders on the satellite, which carries several channels. Further processing selects the channel desired, demodulates it and sends the signal to the television.
History.
An intermediate frequency was first used in the superheterodyne radio receiver, invented by American scientist Major Edwin Armstrong in 1918, during World War I. A member of the Signal Corps, Armstrong was building radio direction finding equipment to track German military signals at the then-very high frequencies of 500 to 3500 kHz. The triode vacuum tube amplifiers of the day would not amplify stably above 500 kHz, however, it was easy to get them to oscillate above that frequency. Armstrong's solution was to set up an oscillator tube that would create a frequency near the incoming signal, and mix it with the incoming signal in a 'mixer' tube, creating a 'heterodyne' or signal at the lower difference frequency, where it could be amplified easily. For example, to pick up a signal at 1500 kHz the local oscillator would be tuned to 1450 kHz. Mixing the two created an intermediate frequency of 50 kHz, which was well within the capability of the tubes.
After the war, in 1920, Armstrong sold the patent for the superheterodyne to Westinghouse, who subsequently sold it to RCA. The increased complexity of the superheterodyne circuit compared to earlier regenerative or tuned radio frequency receiver designs slowed its use, but the advantages of the intermediate frequency for selectivity and static rejection eventually won out; by 1930, most radios sold were 'superhets'. During the development of radar in World War II, the superheterodyne principle was essential for downconversion of the very high radar frequencies to intermediate frequencies. Since then, the superheterodyne circuit, with its intermediate frequency, has been used in virtually all radio receivers.

</doc>
<doc id="83140" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83140" title="Abderus">
Abderus

In Greek mythology Abderus or Abderos () was a divine hero, reputed by some to be one of Heracles's lovers (eromenoi), and reputedly a son of Hermes by some accounts, and eponym of Abdera, Thrace.
The paternity of Abderus differs according to the sources. Some say he was the son of the god Hermes. But according to other writers, he was the son of Thromius the Locrian. Still others claimed he was the son of Heracles's friend, Opian Menoetius, which would make Abderus a brother to Patroclus, the famous companion of Achilles who died at Troy. Pindar makes Abderus a son of Poseidon and Thronia.
He is mostly known for his tragic role in Heracles' Eighth Labor. Along with others, he helped Heracles capture the four savage mares of Diomedes the king of the Thracian Bistones. Heracles overpowered the grooms and drove the Mares of Diomedes into the sea and left them in the care of Abderus. However, while Heracles was away, the horses devoured Abderus. In revenge, Heracles fed Diomedes alive to his own mares. Heracles founded the city of Abdera near Abderus's tomb, where "agones" (Greek: ), athletic games consisting of boxing, pancratium and wrestling were held in his honor (but chariot races were banned in respect of how he died).
In some very different traditions, instead of helping Heracles with his Eighth Labor, Abderus (or Abdertis) was a servant of Diomedes, and was killed by Heracles together with his master and his four men-devouring horses.

</doc>
<doc id="83141" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83141" title="Krka">
Krka

Krka may refer to:
Places:
Rivers:
Sports
Other:
"See also":

</doc>
<doc id="83143" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83143" title="Ernst Lubitsch">
Ernst Lubitsch

Ernst Lubitsch (; January 29, 1892November 30, 1947) was a German American film director, producer, writer, and actor. His urbane comedies of manners gave him the reputation of being Hollywood's most elegant and sophisticated director; as his prestige grew, his films were promoted as having "the Lubitsch touch".
In 1946, he received an Honorary Academy Award for his distinguished contributions to the art of the motion picture. He was also nominated three times for Best Director.
Early life.
Ernst Lubitsch was born on January 29, 1892 in Berlin, Germany, the son of Anna (née Lindenstaedt) and Simon Lubitsch (), a tailor. His family was Ashkenazi Jewish, his father born in Grodno in the Russian Empire and his mother from Wriezen (Oder), outside Berlin. He turned his back on his father's tailoring business to enter the theater, and by 1911, he was a member of Max Reinhardt's Deutsches Theater.
Career.
Weimar years, 1913–21.
In 1913, Lubitsch made his film debut as an actor in "The Ideal Wife". He gradually abandoned acting to concentrate on directing. He appeared in approximately thirty films as an actor between 1912 and 1920. His last film appearance as an actor was in the 1920 drama "Sumurun", opposite Pola Negri and Paul Wegener, which he also directed.
In 1918, he made his mark as a serious director with "Die Augen der Mumie Ma" ("The Eyes of the Mummy"), starring Pola Negri. Lubitsch alternated between escapist comedies and large-scale historical dramas, enjoying great international success with both. His reputation as a grand master of world cinema reached a new peak after the release of his spectacles "Madame Du Barry" (retitled "Passion", 1919) and "Anna Boleyn" ("Deception", 1920). Both of these films found American distributorship by early 1921. They, along with Lubitsch's "Carmen" (released as "Gypsy Blood" in the U.S. in 1921) were selected by "The New York Times" on its list of the 15 most important movies of 1921.
With glowing reviews under his belt, and American money flowing his way, Lubitsch formed his own production company and set to work on the high-budget spectacular "The Loves of Pharaoh" (1921). Lubitsch sailed to the United States for the first time in December 1921 for what was intended as a lengthy publicity and professional factfinding tour, scheduled to culminate in the February premiere of "Pharaoh". However, with World War I still fresh, and with a slew of German "New Wave" releases encroaching on American movie workers' livelihoods, Lubitsch was not gladly received. He cut his trip short after little more than three weeks and returned to Germany. But he had already seen enough of the American film industry to know that its resources far outstripped the spartan German companies.
Hollywood silent films, 1922–27.
Lubitsch finally left Germany for Hollywood in 1922, contracted as a director by Mary Pickford. He directed Pickford in the film "Rosita"; the result was a critical and commercial success, but director and star clashed during its filming, and it ended up as the only project that they made together. A free agent after just one American film, Lubitsch was signed to a remarkable three-year, six-picture contract by Warner Brothers that guaranteed the director his choice of both cast and crew, and full editing control over the final cut.
Settling in America, Lubitsch established his reputation for sophisticated comedy with such stylish films as "The Marriage Circle" (1924), "Lady Windermere's Fan" (1925), and "So This Is Paris" (1926). But his films were only marginally profitable for Warner Brothers, and Lubitsch's contract was eventually dissolved by mutual consent, with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Paramount buying out the remainder. His first film for MGM, "The Student Prince in Old Heidelberg" (1927), was well regarded, but lost money. "The Patriot" (1928), produced by Paramount, earned him his first Academy Award nomination for Best Directing.
Sound films, 1928–40.
Lubitsch seized upon the advent of talkies to direct musicals. With his first sound film, "The Love Parade" (1929), starring Maurice Chevalier and Jeanette MacDonald, Lubitsch hit his stride as a maker of worldly musical comedies (and earned himself another Oscar nomination). "The Love Parade" (1929), "Monte Carlo" (1930), and "The Smiling Lieutenant" (1931) were hailed by critics as masterpieces of the newly emerging musical genre. Lubitsch served on the faculty of the University of Southern California for a time.
His next film was a romantic comedy, written with Samson Raphaelson, "Trouble in Paradise" (1932). Later described (approvingly) as "truly amoral" by critic David Thomson, the cynical comedy was popular both with critics and with audiences. But it was a project that could only have been made before the enforcement of the Production Code, and after 1935, "Trouble in Paradise" was withdrawn from circulation. It was not seen again until 1968. The film was never available on videocassette and only became available on DVD in 2003.
Writing about Lubitsch's work, critic Michael Wilmington observed:
Whether with music, as in MGM's opulent "The Merry Widow" (1934) and Paramount's "One Hour with You" (1932), or without, as in "Design for Living" (1933), Lubitsch continued to specialize in comedy. He made only one other dramatic film, the antiwar "Broken Lullaby" (also known as "The Man I Killed", 1932).
In 1935, he was appointed Paramount's production manager, thus becoming the only major Hollywood director to run a large studio. Lubitsch subsequently produced his own films and supervised the production of films of other directors. But Lubitsch had trouble delegating authority, which was a problem when he was overseeing sixty different films. He was fired after a year on the job, and returned to full-time moviemaking. In 1936, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States.
On July 27, 1935 he had married British actress Vivian Gaye. They had one daughter, Nicola Lubitsch, on October 27, 1938. When war was declared in Europe, Vivian Lubitsch and her daughter were staying in London. Vivian sent her baby daughter, accompanied by her nursemaid, Consuela Strohmeier, to Montreal aboard the Donaldson Atlantic Line's , which was sunk by a German submarine on September 3, 1939 with a loss of 118 passengers. The child and the nurse survived.
In 1939, Lubitsch moved to MGM, and directed Greta Garbo in "Ninotchka". Garbo and Lubitsch were friendly and had hoped to work together on a movie for years, but this would be their only project. The film, co-written by Billy Wilder, is a satirical comedy in which the famously serious actress' laughing scene was heavily promoted by studio publicists with the tagline "Garbo Laughs!"
In 1940, he directed "The Shop Around the Corner", an artful comedy of cross purposes. The film reunited Lubitsch with his "Merry Widow" screenwriter Raphaelson, and starred James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan as a pair of bickering co-workers in Budapest, each unaware that the other is their secret romantic correspondent. David Thomson wrote of it:
Later films, 1941–47.
Lubitsch next directed "That Uncertain Feeling" (1941), a remake of his 1925 film "Kiss Me Again". Produced independently by Lubitsch together with Sol Lesser, it was not a commercial success. Lubitsch followed it with a film that has become one his best regarded comedies, "To Be or Not to Be", a witty, dark and cynical film about a troupe of actors in Nazi-occupied Poland. He spent the balance of his career at 20th Century Fox, but a heart condition curtailed his activity, and he spent much of his time in supervisory capacities. It has been claimed that the last picture made by the director with his distinctive "touch" was "Heaven Can Wait" (1943), another Raphaelson collaboration. The film is about Henry Van Cleve (played by Don Ameche), who presents himself at the gates of Hell to recount his life and the women he has known from his mother onwards, concentrating on his happy but sometimes difficult 25 years of marriage to Martha (Gene Tierney).
After "Heaven Can Wait", Lubitsch worked with Edwin Justus Mayer on the scripting process of "A Royal Scandal" (1945), a remake of Ernst Lubitsch's silent film "A Forbidden Paradise". Mayer wrote the screenplay for "A Royal Scandal", and had worked with Lubitsch on "To Be or Not to Be" (1942). The script of "A Royal Scandal" (1945) was written and prepared under Ernst Lubitsch, and he was the original director of this film, and directed the rehearsals. He became ill during shooting, so Lubitsch hired Otto Preminger to do the rest of the shooting. But "A Royal Scandal" is considered "a Lubitsch picture". After "A Royal Scandal", Ernst Lubitsch regained his health, and directed "Cluny Brown" (1946), with Charles Boyer and Jennifer Jones.
In March 1947, Lubitsch was awarded a Special Academy Award for his "25-year contribution to motion pictures". Presenter Mervyn LeRoy, calling Lubitsch "a master of innuendo", described some of his attributes as a filmmaker: "He had an adult mind and a hatred of saying things the obvious way." Lubitsch was the subject of several interviews at that time, and consistently cited "The Shop Around the Corner" as his favorite of his films. Considering his overall career, he mused, "I made sometimes pictures which were not up to my standard, but then it can only be said about a mediocrity that all his works live up to his standard."
Death.
Lubitsch died of a heart attack on November 30, 1947 in Hollywood, and was buried at Glendale Forest Lawn in Glendale, CA. His last film, "That Lady in Ermine" with Betty Grable, was completed by Otto Preminger and released posthumously in 1948.
Leaving Lubitsch's funeral, Billy Wilder ruefully said, "No more Lubitsch." William Wyler responded, "Worse than that. No more Lubitsch pictures." Wilder had a sign over his office door, which read "How would Lubitsch do it?" Lubitsch is interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale) in Eventide, L-2896. He has a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7040 Hollywood Blvd., Hollywood, California.
Lubitsch touch.
Biographer Scott Eyman attempted to characterize the famed "Lubitsch touch":
Career assessment and legacy.
In 1946, he received an Honorary Academy Award for his distinguished contributions to the art of the motion picture. He was also nominated three times for Best Director.

</doc>
<doc id="83146" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83146" title="Acherusia">
Acherusia

In Greek mythology, Acherusia (), was a name given by the ancients to several lakes or swamps, which, like the various rivers called Acheron, were at some time believed to be connected with the lower world, until at last the Acherusia came to be considered to be in the lower world itself.
The lake to which this belief seems to have been first attached was the Acherusia in Thesprotia, through which the river Acheron flowed. Other lakes or swamps of the same name, and believed to be in connection with the lower world, were near Hermione in Argolis, near Heraclea in Bithynia, between Cumae and cape Misenum in Campania, and lastly in Egypt, near Memphis.
In Greek mythology, it was also the name of an underground cavern, through which Heracles dragged Cerberus as one of his Twelve Labors.

</doc>
<doc id="83147" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83147" title="Henry Tudor">
Henry Tudor

Henry Tudor may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83148" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83148" title="Danaë">
Danaë

__notoc__
In Greek mythology, Danaë ( or , as personal name also , ) was the daughter, and only child of King Acrisius of Argos and his wife Queen Eurydice. She was the mother of the hero Perseus by Zeus. She was credited with founding the city of Ardea in Latium during the Bronze Age.
Disappointed by his lack of male heirs, King Acrisius asked the oracle of Delphi if this would change. The oracle announced to him that he would never have a son, but his daughter would, and that he would be killed by his daughter's son. At the time, Danae was childless and, meaning to keep her so, King Acrisius shut her up in a bronze chamber to be constructed under the court of his palace (other versions say she was imprisoned in a tall brass tower with a single richly adorned chamber, but with no doors or windows, just a sky-light as the source of light and air). She was buried in this tomb, never to see the light again. However, Zeus, the king of the gods, desired her, and came to her in the form of golden rain which streamed in through the roof of the subterranean chamber and down into her womb. Soon after, their child Perseus was born.
Unwilling to provoke the wrath of the gods or the Furies by killing his offspring and grandchild, King Acrisius cast Danaë and Perseus into the sea in a wooden chest. The sea was calmed by Poseidon and, at the request of Zeus, the pair survived. They were washed ashore on the island of Seriphos, where they were taken in by Dictys – the brother of King Polydectes – who raised Perseus to manhood. The King was charmed by Danaë, but she had no interest in him. Consequently, he agreed not to marry her only if her son would bring him the head of the Gorgon Medusa. Using Athena's shield, Hermes's winged sandals and Hades' helmet of invisibility, Perseus was able to evade Medusa's gaze and decapitate her.
Later, after Perseus brought back Medusa's head and rescued Andromeda, the oracle's prophecy came true. He started for Argos, but learning of the prophecy, instead went to Larissa, where athletic games were being held. By chance, an aging Acrisius was there and Perseus accidentally struck him on the head with his javelin (or discus), fulfilling the prophecy.

</doc>
<doc id="83150" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83150" title="Dictys">
Dictys

Dictys () was a name attributed to four men in Greek mythology.

</doc>
<doc id="83151" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83151" title="Polydectes">
Polydectes

In Greek mythology, King Polydectes () was the ruler of the island of Seriphos, son of either Magnes and an unnamed Naiad, or of Peristhenes and Androthoe, or of Poseidon and Cerebia. His story is largely a part of the myth of Perseus, and runs as follows according to the "Bibliotheca" and John Tzetzes.
Polydectes fell in love with Danaë when she and her son Perseus were saved by his brother Dictys (see: Acrisius). Perseus, old enough by the time, was very protective of his mother and wouldn't allow Polydectes near Danaë. Therefore, Polydectes hatched a plot to get rid of him so he could marry her. Under the pretence that he was going to marry Hippodamia, he ordered every man in Seriphos to supply him with suitable gifts. His friends were to provide horses but Perseus failed to bring any, so Polydectes announced that he wanted nothing more than the head of the Gorgon Medusa, being that Perseus had previously said he was up to a task so harsh as fetching a Gorgon's head. Perseus agreed and Polydectes told him that he could not return to the island without it. Perseus slew Medusa, supposedly using his shield as a mirror to avoid looking at her.
When Perseus returned to Seriphos with the Gorgon's head, he found that, in his absence, his mother was threatened and abused (or even raped) by Polydectes, and had to seek refuge in a temple. Perseus was outraged and strode into the throne room where Polydectes and other nobles were convening. Polydectes was surprised that the hero was still alive and refused to believe Perseus had accomplished the deed he was sent out to do. Perseus professed that he did slay the Gorgon Medusa, and as proof, he revealed her severed head. When Polydectes and his nobles gazed upon the prize, they were then turned to solid stone. In a version recorded by Hyginus, Polydectes attempted to treacherously kill Perseus in fear of his courage, but Perseus was just in time to expose the Gorgon's head before him. Perseus then handed the kingdom of Seriphos over to Dictys.
In an alternate version followed by Hyginus, Polydectes married Danae as she was brought to him by Dictys, and had Perseus brought up in a temple of Athena. He did not abuse Perseus and Danae, but rather protected them from Acrisius as the latter discovered that they had survived and arrived at Seriphos to kill them. Perseus eventually swore to never kill his grandfather, but Polydectes soon died and at his funeral games Perseus accidentally hit Acrisius with a discus, which resulted in Acrisius' death.

</doc>
<doc id="83153" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83153" title="Phineus (disambiguation)">
Phineus (disambiguation)

Phineus is a Greek mythological king of Thrace, visited by Jason and the Argonauts.
Phineus may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83154" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83154" title="Megapenthes">
Megapenthes

In Greek mythology, Megapenthes ( "Megapénthēs") is a name that refers to:

</doc>
<doc id="83155" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83155" title="Perseides">
Perseides

In Greek mythology the Perseides, "those born of Perseus" and Andromeda, are the members of the House of Perseus, descended, according to Valerius Flaccus through Perse and Perses.
After the Greek Dark Ages, tradition recalled that Perseus and his descendants the Perseides had ruled Tiryns in Mycenaean times, while the allied branch descended from Perseus' great-uncle Proëtos ruled in Argos.
Perseus and Andromeda had seven sons: Perses, Alcaeus, Heleus, Mestor, Sthenelus, Electryon, and Cynurus, and two daughters, Gorgophone, and Autochthe. Perses was left in Aethiopia and became an ancestor of the Persians. The other descendants ruled Mycenae from Electryon down to Eurystheus, after whom Atreus got the kingdom. The most renowned of the Perseides was Greece's greatest hero, Heracles son of Zeus and Alcmene, daughter of Electryon.

</doc>
<doc id="83157" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83157" title="École centrale de Lyon">
École centrale de Lyon

The École centrale de Lyon, founded in 1857, is one of the oldest graduate schools in France. It is considered as one of the most prestigious French grandes écoles of engineering continuously ranking as one of the top six French engineering research institutions for the post bachelor study. The university is situated in Écully, a western suburb of Lyon, France (in a region called Rhônes Alpes).
The university is one of the six members of the Centrale Graduate School (Lille, Paris, Marseilles, Nantes, Beijing). The school is well-reputed for educating and training highly skilled engineers with a minimum degree of BSc through many specialized postgraduate programs. Ecole centrale de Lyon is a founding member of University of Lyon, Pole Research and Higher Education (PRES) established as a public establishment of scientific cooperation. The school excels in the research attached to acoustics, biosciences and nanotechnology.
Ecole centrale de Lyon, or as sometimes referred to ECL, has strong ties with top institutions in Europe including Imperial College London and Darmstadt University of Technology. This in addition to having most of its post graduate programs shared between INSA Lyon, École Normale Supérieure de Lyon and Claude Bernard University Lyon 1.
History and location.
It was founded in 1857 on a private initiative by Désiré Girardon, who was its first president. The founding vision was to educate multidisciplinary engineers for the emerging industry (“doctors for fabs and plants”). The institution was given to the French State Ministry of Education in 1947. Initially located downtown Lyon, it was transferred to Écully, its current location.
Academics.
The "centralien" program is the main academic program offered by the École centrale de Lyon, as a Centrale Graduate School. It is quite different from typical university or college studies; and specific to the French system of grandes écoles. The engineering degree of École centrale de Lyon ("ingénieur centralien" or “centralien engineer”) is a Master of Science degree.
The defining characteristic of the curriculum is that it is multidisciplinary, with studies focusing on all math and physics derived engineering specialties: mechanics, physics, materials, fluid mechanics, electrical engineering, applied mathematics, civil engineering, aeronautics, computer science, telecommunications and micro-nano-biotechnology.
Admission.
The large majority of the students are admitted after two to three years of classes préparatoires, known as "mathematics superior" and "mathematics special", which are an undergraduate courses with almost exclusive emphasis on math and physics. These undergraduate students must then take a nationwide competitive entrance examination (Concours Centrale-Supélec) to enter a Centrale Graduate School, including Ecole centrale de Lyon. Ecole centrale de Lyon recruits among the top 6% of the students in "classes preparatoires", who represent themselves 7% of higher education students, which makes it a selective and prestigious institution.
A few seats are available each year to select students from French universities after completion of three or four years of post high-school education.
A significant contingent of students also comes from leading international universities which belong to the TIME network.
Curriculum.
Education at the ECL is multidisciplinary and typically lasts three to four years. During the first two years ("tronc commun", or "common trunk"), students take mandatory classes in science (mathematics, physics); in engineering (solid mechanics, heat transfer, digital image processing, computer programming) and in social sciences (economics, management, foreign languages). Students are then offered to sign up for different engineering specialties during their last year at the school. After completing these three years of education, they receive the degree of "ingénieur de l'École centrale de Lyon", more commonly called "ingénieur centralien".
National and international ties.
The "École centrale de Lyon" belongs to the French Centrale Graduate School, together with École centrale Paris, École centrale de Lille, École centrale de Nantes, École centrale de Marseille and École centrale de Pékin (Beijing, China).
Since 1857, the school has built important international ties. Students come from around the world to study for several years on the school campus. "école centrale" students may also obtain a double diploma at one of several partner schools. Furthermore, the école is one of the founding members of the TIME network. (member list)
Research.
The École centrale de Lyon is highly involved in research, and has the highest rate of PhD lecturers amidst the French grandes écoles.
ECL hosts seven research centers related to the University of Lyon:
Ampère.
The overall objective of the research at Ampere is the management and rational use of energy in the systems in relation to their environment.
Ampère was born in 2007:
Contractualised with CNRS and three establishments in Lyon (ECL, INSA, UCBL), Ampere has over 160 employees.
Tags:
The laboratory is organized into three scientific departments:
ICJ.
Camille Jordan Institute for mathematical sciences.
ICTT.
ICTT Laboratory undertakes research in the field of information and communication technologies and their use.
INL.
The Institute of Nanotechnologies of Lyon was created on 1 January 2007, through the merger of three laboratories: the Laboratory of Electronics, Optoelectronics and Microsystems (Laboratoire d'Electronique Optoélectronique et Microsystèmes - LEOM) of Ecole centrale de Lyon, the Laboratory of Material Physics (Laboratoire de Physique de la Matière - LPM) of INSA de Lyon and the Laboratory of Electronics Nanotechnologies and Sensors (Laboratoire d'Electronique Nanotechnologies et Capteurs - LENAC) of Université Lyon 1.
The Lyon Institute of Nanotechnology (INL) is a fundamental and applied research laboratory in the field of micro- and nano-technology. Its mission is to conduct research towards the development of fully-fledged technologies for a broad range of application sectors (semiconductors and micro-electronics, telecoms, energy, health, biology, industrial control, defence, environment).
Research is organised around four main topics (organized in departments):
Functional Materials, Electronics, Photonics & Photovoltaics and Biotechnology and Health.
The research programs draw on the resources of the Lyon-based Nanolyon technology platform.
A transversal research operation is specifically dedicated to the development of nanocharacterization tools and techniques.
The laboratory is situated on the campuses of Ecole centrale de Lyon, INSA Lyon, University of Lyon 1 and CPE. It comprises 120 permanent staff and approximately 95 non-permanent staff. The annual budget excluding salaries is about 3M€.
LMFA.
Thee LMFA is a joint research unit attached to the CNRS, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 and INSA Lyon. It is a member of the Institut Carnot Engineering at Lyon.
The activity of the laboratory is organized around four research groups: Centre for Acoustics, Fluid complex and Transfers Turbomachinery, Turbulence and Stability.
The research focuses on the physics and modeling of turbulence, hydrodynamic instabilities, two-phase flows, environmental fluid mechanics, aerodynamics internal thermal phenomena coupled aeroacoustics, acoustic propagation, methods of solving Navier–Stokes equations, the active or passive control of flow, microfluidics.
This research lead to numerous collaborations with industry players and institutional areas of transport, environment and energy. The goal is to provide developers with the tools of analysis and modeling to optimize their products or processes and reduce the energy and environmental impact.
In the transport sector, the LMFA developed an expertise on turbine (axial compressors of aircraft engines, turbo and centrifugal machines) on the reduction of noise (cars, planes, TGV) and the new engine cars. Research in the environment focuses on mass transfer in the atmosphere, environmental hydraulics, noise and noise pollution, industrial hazards. The study covers the energy sector, particularly in terms of process optimization fluids, nuclear or oil phase flow, hydraulic turbines, new energy sources
LTDS.
The Laboratory of Tribology and Systems Dynamics, was created in 1992 and in January 1995 became a Mixed Unit of Research CNRS-MESR (ECL-ENISE) (UMR 5513) which depends on the Scientific Department Engineering and Information Sciences and Technologies, depending on Section 9 of the Evaluation National Committee. LTDS is on two sites: centrale Lyon (main site) and the National School of Engineers at Saint-Etienne.
Its scientific field is broad and covers tribology (study of friction, wear, lubrication, adherence), systems dynamics (control of vibrations and stability of systems and machine parts) Solids Mechanics (structures calculation) and transformation processes (cut, assembly, etc.).
The LTDS's existence is due to the succession of the following events:
LIRIS.
LIRIS (Laboratoire d’InfoRmatique en Image et Systèmes d’information) was created in 2003 through the merging of several former laboratories involved in Communication and Information Technology research. LIRIS is affiliated to CNRS (Centre National de Recherche Scientifique) under the label UMR 5205.
The laboratory involves 280 people with 94 faculty members and researchers from INSA de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Université Lumière Lyon 2 and CNRS.
The laboratory is organized in two departments:
The laboratory leads research on fundamental issues in these areas (image, and data, knowledge and services). It also investigates applications with an impact on society:
Culture and heritage (digital libraries, critical edition, digitization of ancient documents, archiving, 3D virtual museums, etc.)
Ambient intelligence (pervasive systems, sensor networks, intelligent video surveillance, secured communicating objects, etc.)
Biology and health (data mining, complex systems modeling and analysis, e-health, etc.)
Human learning (personalization, cognitive assistance, collaborative learning, etc.)
Digital entertainment (video games, animated cinema, multimedia data processing, etc.)
The Graduate School.
In addition to the "centralien" engineering programme, the "École centrale de Lyon" offers a broad range of master's programs in science and engineering (1 or 2 year-programmes). These programmes are opened to applicants having completed their undergraduate studies at other institutions.
The ECL also has a PhD program for students with a master's level. More than 100 doctoral candidates work in five different laboratories in the school.

</doc>
<doc id="83158" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83158" title="École centrale de Nantes">
École centrale de Nantes

École centrale de Nantes is a French Grande école of engineering, established in 1919 under the name of "Institut Polytechnique de l'Ouest".
École centrale de Nantes is one of the Centrale Graduate Schools associated as the Groupe Centrale network with its sister institutions (Paris, Lille, Lyon, Marseille and Beijing). A member of the TIME (Top Industrial Managers for Europe) network, that enables student exchanges among leading European engineering schools, it is also a founder of the France AEROTECH association of French engineering schools.
Location.
The Ecole Centrale de Nantes is located in Nantes, France (in a region called Pays-de-la-Loire). Nantes is only two hours by train from Paris. Nantes is the sixth largest city in France, and is also located on the riverside of the Loire and only 50 km away from the Atlantic coast.
History.
The Ecole Centrale Nantes was founded in 1919.
Being first called "Institut Polytechnique de l'Ouest", the school's courses were various: electricity, mechanics, chemistry and smelting works.
In 1977, the school moved and took place in actual premises.
In 1991, it became the "Ecole Centrale de Nantes" and since, belongs to the Centrale Graduate School. As a Centrale Graduate School, it implements a similar Centralien programme of engineering education as in École centrale de Lille, École centrale de Lyon, École centrale de Marseille, École centrale Paris and Ecole Centrale de Pekin. In 2011, the school became a member of France AEROTECH.
Academics.
Admission.
There are lots of ways to become a student of The Ecole centrale de Nantes.
For foreign students, there are three different curricula (An engineering degree, a master's degree or a PhD). But the way to enter Ecole centrale de Nantes is quite similar for these three.
The admission depends on each university partner of "Ecole centrale de Nantes". But generally, you can build a case and then have interviews with professors from the Centrale Graduate School. All these steps are made to decide if your level is high enough to follow the courses at "Ecole centrale de Nantes"'.
French students must succeed in a nationwide selective exam with numerus claususis called Concours Centrale-Supelec. In the French superior educational system, after the Baccalaureat (the equivalent of A-levels) students have two options:
Either go to a faculty and make a specialization that gives them a License degree in 3 years and a master's degree in 5 years of study;
Or they try to enter a Classe préparatoire and then try to get into a "French Grandes écoles. The Concours Centrale-Supelec is one way to do so.
Curriculum.
Engineering Trainee Programs.
Education at "Ecole centrale de Nantes" is multidisciplinary and lasts from three to four years. During the first two years, students take mandatory classes in science (Mathematics, Physics); in engineering (Solid and Fluid Mechanics, Heat transfer, Digital image processing, Computer programming, electronics...) and in social sciences (Economics, Marketing, Management, foreign languages...). Students are then offered to sign up for different engineering specialties during their last year at the school.
During these 3 years, every student has to validate a minimum 4 months stay abroad, by a semester in a foreign partner university or by an abroad internship. Every student of the engineering trainee program receives the degree of “ingénieur de l'École centrale de Nantes”, more commonly called “ingénieur centralien”. It’s equivalent to a European engineering master degree.
More information on this page
Master’s Programs.
The Ecole centrale de Nantes offers scholarships to students with excellent academic records.
Master Erasmus Mundus.
Erasmus Mundus is a program which aims at improving the quality of the European Higher Education and at strengthening the intercultural understanding.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" is certified Erasmus Mundus for 3 programs of master's degree:
The Erasmus Mundus program encourages and supports student’s international mobility and the cooperation between European and no European universities. The objectives are to promote the European higher education as a brilliant academic platform.
It also contributes to the sustainable development, developing countries' higher education and to allows students to reach the best careers' perspectives.
PhD.
All fields of investigation are related to the science of engineering, i.e. automatic control, robotics, telecommunication, oceanic engineering,or even civil engineering.
Centrale Nantes is strongly implicated in the two doctoral schools.
The two schools are accredited in both the establishments.
The scientific production each year, on average, leads to 30 to 35 doctorate theses.
National and international partnerships.
The Ecole Centrale de Nantes collaborates with numerous industrial and educational partners within France as well as in an international scope.
National partnerships.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" is a public amenity and is thus a subject to the French ministry of higher education and research. The Ministry is responsible for the distribution of the allocated state funds and is thus an important partner of "Ecole Centrale de Nantes ".
The five other grandes ecoles Ecole centrale Paris, Ecole Centrale de Lyon, Ecole Centrale de Lille, Ecole centrale de Marseille and Ecole centrale de Pekin and "Ecole centrale de Nantes" have joined together and have formed the Centrale Graduate School alliance. Being a member of that alliance,"Ecole centrale de Nantes" offers the possibility to its students to enrich their education by attending courses of one of the 5 other members during an exchange.
Besides the members of the Central Graduate School alliance,"Ecole Centrale de Nantes" has numerous additional French educational partners, which are listed in the following:
In collaboration with "Audencia" and the "Ecole nationale supérieure d'architecture","Ecole centrale de Nantes" provides the possibility to take part in two double degree programs. On the one hand a combination of a diploma in engineering and a diploma in management and on the other hand a diploma in engineering and a diploma in architecture.
International partnerships.
One of the strengths of "Ecole centrale de Nantes" is its international spirit which is not only physically present on the campus (30% of the students are foreign students) but also mentally: All engineering students attend courses in two foreign languages and a stay abroad for at least 6 weeks is foreseen in every student’s formation.
In addition, "Ecole centrale de Nantes" is member of the TIME network allowing its students to take part in a double degree program at one of the TIME partner universities which are scattered all over Europe. About 35% of the students at "Ecole centrale de Nantes" decide each year to enter in the TIME program.
Furthermore, "Ecole centrale de Nantes" maintains individual partnerships with universities all over the world. The great variety of offers for the stay abroad enables the student to prepare best for an international work environment according to his or her preferences. The internationality together with the gained scientific skills completes the profile of a highly educated graduate of "Ecole Centrale de Nantes". See all partner universities
Industrial partnerships.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" works closely together with its industrial partners and thus ensures an on the current needs of the industries oriented scientific environment. Moreover, its network in the industry facilitates the search for an internship and acts as a door opener for the student.
Some industrial partners of "Ecole Centrale de Nantes" shall be listed in the following:
And even more.
Other partnerships.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" is also strongly implicated in internationals programs such as WILLpower, which stands for Window India Learning Link Power.
The program's aim is to promote an international network with European universities and Indian Universities.
Research.
Research at Ecole centrale Nantes is carried out in highly competitive laboratories. Theses labs are internationally recognized, as collaborate with a lot of firms.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" hosts 4 laboratories, recognized as CNRS laboratories:
Robotics, Image, Signal et Automatics, Mechanical and Productive Systems, Electronic Systems, Telecom and Radar
Hydrodynamics and Ocean Engineering, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Dynamics of Inhabited Atmosphere, Internal Combustion Engines
Metallic and Composites Assemblies, Computational Mechanics, Polymers, Dynamics and Processing Technology
Non linear PDE, Probability statistic..
"Ecole Centrale de Nantes" has also launched the "Chaire Fondation EADS Centrale Nantes" on September 9, 19th, a highly skilled research center: Advanced Modeling of Composites Manufacturing Processes
See the Chaire Fondation EADS Centrale Nantes presentation sheet (in French)
Notable Alumni and Faculties.
"Ecole centrale de Nantes" alumni are effective persons in their professional career as a result of good quality of education and research in the University. Most of them spread all around the world and became Faculty and Researcher of the prestigious universities. Also some of them have shined in Industry, Art and Culture as well as Politician.
Some Noted Alumni and Faculties are as,
Life on campus.
The DRI (Direction des Relations Internationales).
The DRI is the "International Relations Office" of "Ecole centrale de Nantes". The DRI does its utmost to make the arrival and the stay of foreign students the best as possible.
The DRI keeps in touch with every foreign student after they obtain their degrees.
Student housing.
The DRI can help the foreign students to find an accommodation near Ecole Centrale de Nantes.
Entertainment associations and clubs.
There are many associations and clubs at the Ecoles centrale de Nantes, led by students. Among them the biggest three are:
The Student Association.
The leading members organise the integration week, parties in night clubs or sometimes slightly calmer evenings on the school campus.
They also provide bus tickets, dinner tickets for lunch in the canteen and even travelling journeys!
Students can take part in a lot of clubs which have different aims:
And much more!
The Sport Association.
Playing sport is very important and encouraged at "Ecole centrale de Nantes". The best players are offered chances to participate in university, departmental or national championships.
For instance, last year the Volleyball team participated in the "Amsterdam's SUV Championship" and the rugby team participate in the "7 à Paris championship".
Here is a list of sports played at "Ecole centrale de Nantes".
The Cultural Association.
With them, you'll learn everything related to what "culture" means: dancing, music, movies, art...

</doc>
<doc id="83160" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83160" title="École Centrale Paris">
École Centrale Paris

École Centrale Paris () is a French university-level institution ("grande école") in the field of engineering science. It is also known by its original name École Centrale des Arts et Manufactures (ECP) and its alumni are called "Centraliens".
Founded in 1829, it is one of the oldest and most prestigious engineering schools in France and has the special status of "Grand établissement". "École Centrale Paris" offers graduate degree programs as well as PhD opportunities.
"École Centrale Paris" is one of the Centrale Graduate Schools associated as the "Groupe Centrale" network with its sister institutions (Lille, Lyon, Marseille, Nantes, Beijing, Hyderabad (with Mahindra Group) and Casablanca). The school has partnerships with leading universities, such as University of Cambridge, RWTH Aachen, ETH Zurich, National University of Singapore and Tsinghua University. It was a founding member of the TIME (Top Industrial Managers for Europe) network among leading European engineering schools, and also a member of the UniverSud Paris and the CESAER association of European engineering schools.
In 2015, "École Centrale Paris" merged with Supélec and became "CentraleSupélec", a member of the "Université Paris-Saclay".
Location.
"École Centrale Paris" is located in Châtenay-Malabry, Hauts-de-Seine, a southern suburb of Paris, France (in the Île-de-France region), next to the "Parc de Sceaux" and its Château de Sceaux.
History.
The "École" was founded in 1829 on a private initiative by Alphonse Lavallée, who became its first president, and three scientist associates: Eugène Peclet, Jean-Baptiste Dumas, and Théodore Olivier. The founding vision was to educate multidisciplinary engineers for the emerging industrial sector. The institution was offered to the French state in 1857 by its creator, Alphonse Lavallée.
Initially located in the "Hôtel de Juigné" (now "Hôtel Salé" and home to the "Musée Picasso"), it was transferred to "rue Montgolfier" in 1884, where it stayed until 1969. Its current location neighbours the "Parc de Sceaux".
Former location of the "École Centrale, rue Montgolfier" in Paris (3rd arrondissement): 
The "Centralien" Programme.
The "centralien" Program is the original and main programme offered by the "École". It is quite different from typical university or college studies; and specific to the French system of "grandes écoles". Studies go beyond the undergraduate level and the engineering degree of "École Centrale Paris" ("Ingénieur centralien") is equivalent to a Master of Science. The curriculum is similar to those offered at other French "généraliste grandes écoles".
Admission.
Most of the students are admitted after two to three years of "classes préparatoires", which correspond to two years of post high-school education with heavy emphasis on math and physics (freshman and sophomore years at US universities). At the end of the second year ("Mathématiques spéciales") students can take a nationwide competitive entrance examination for the "grandes écoles", including "École Centrale Paris". The ECP recruits among the top 4% of the students in "classes préparatoires", who represent themselves 4% of higher education students . A few students come from French top universities after completing three years of post high-school education. A significant contingent of students also comes from leading international universities which belong to the Top Industrial Managers for Europe (TIME) network.
Curriculum.
Education at the ECP is multidisciplinary and typically lasts three to four years. During the first year ("Tronc Commun", or 'Common Core'), students are required to take classes in science (Mathematics, Physics, Biology); in engineering (Continuum Mechanics, Heat transfer, Digital image processing, Computer programming,…) and in social sciences (Economics, Management, foreign languages,…). After this year of "Tronc Commun", students choose all their course in a list respecting expectations from the administration. An excellent level in sciences is required. Then in the third year, students chose a major in a particular field which they study for one year. After completing these 3 years of education, they receive the degree of "Ingénieur des arts et manufactures", more commonly called "ingénieur centralien".
National and international ties.
The "École Centrale Paris" belongs to the French "intergroupe des écoles centrales", together with "École Centrale de Lyon", "École Centrale de Lille", "École Centrale de Nantes", "École Centrale de Marseille" and "École Centrale de Pékin" (Beijing).
Since 1837, the school has international ties with several universities.
Research.
The ECP hosts eight laboratories:
The graduate school.
In addition to the "centralien" training, the "École Centrale Paris" offers a broad range of master's programmes in science and engineering (1 year- or 2 year-programs). These programmes are open to applicants having completed their undergraduate studies at other institutions.
The ECP also has a Ph.D. programme for students with a master's level. More than 200 doctoral candidates work in one of the 8 laboratories of the school.
Alumni.
They include:
Notable faculty.
They include:

</doc>
<doc id="83161" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83161" title="Autonoë">
Autonoë

In Greek mythology, Autonoë (; ) was a daughter of Cadmus, founder of Thebes, Greece, and the goddess Harmonia. She was the wife of Aristaeus and mother of Actaeon and possibly Macris. In Euripides' play, "The Bacchae", she and her sisters were driven into a bacchic frenzy by the god Dionysus (her nephew) when Pentheus, the king of Thebes, refused to allow his worship in the city. When Pentheus came to spy on their revels, Agave, the mother of Pentheus and Autonoë's sister, spotted him in a tree. They tore him to pieces.
Actaeon, the son of Autonoë, was eaten by his own hounds as punishment for glimpsing Artemis naked. Autonoë, being distressed, left Thebes to go to Ereneia, a village of the Megarians, where she died.

</doc>
<doc id="83162" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83162" title="Nisos">
Nisos

In Greek mythology, Nisos was the King of Megara, and one of the four sons of Pandion II, King of Athens. 
He was married to Abrota, sister of Megareus, and when she died, Nisos commanded that the Megarian women wear clothes like she had. His daughter Eurynome, with Poseidon, had the famous son Bellerophon. His second daughter Iphinoe married Megareus, her maternal uncle. The third daughter Scylla was responsible for Nisos' death. 
Metion, the uncle of Nisos, had seized the throne from Pandion II. However, upon their father's death, Nisos and his brothers (Aegeas, Pallas, and Lykos) returned to Athens and took back control. They drove out the sons of Metion, put Aegeus on the throne, and divided the government in four. Aegeas became king of Athens, and Nisos the King of Megara. 
Minos, King of Crete, attacked Nisos's kingdom during a war with Athens over the death of his son Androgeus. Nisos however had a lock of purple hair that kept him safe from harm. Eros caused his daughter Scylla to fall in love with Minos. In one version, Minos tempts Scylla with a golden necklace to betray and kill her father. In another version, she fell in love with Minos from a distance, and after cutting off the purple lock, she presented it to Minos. However, Minos was disgusted with her act, calling her a disgrace. As Minos's ships set sail, Scylla attempted to climb up one of them. But Nisos, who had turned into a sea eagle or osprey, attacked her. His daughter transformed into a bird as well. There is also a version with Ares.

</doc>
<doc id="83164" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83164" title="Metion">
Metion

In Greek mythology, Metion (; , "gen". Μητίονος) was a son of King Erechtheus of Athens or of Eupalamus, son of King Erechtheus. His sons later drove King Pandion II out of Athens into exile. Among these sons were Eupalamus, Sicyon, and Daedalus, though they are sometime credited with other parentages. These usurping sons were in turn overthrown by the sons of Pandion.

</doc>
<doc id="83166" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83166" title="Rhêxênor">
Rhêxênor

Rhexenoror Rhêxênor can refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83167" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83167" title="Aethalides">
Aethalides

Aethalides () was a son of Hermes and Eupolemeia, a daughter of Myrmidon. He was the herald of the Argonauts, and had received from his father the faculty of remembering everything, even in Hades. He was further allowed to reside alternately in the upper and in the lower world. As his soul could not forget anything even after death, it remembered that from the body of Aethalides it had successively migrated into those of Euphorbus, Hermotimus, Pyrrhus, and at last into that of Pythagoras, in whom it still retained the recollection of its former migrations.

</doc>
<doc id="83168" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83168" title="Ain">
Ain

Ain (; Arpitan: En) is a department named after the Ain River on the eastern edge of France. Being part of the region Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes and bordered by the rivers Saône and Rhône, the department of Ain enjoys a privileged geographic situation. It has an excellent transport network (TGV, highways) and benefits from the proximity to the international airports of Lyon and Geneva.
Ain is composed of four geographically different areas (Bresse, Dombes, Bugey and Pays de Gex) which – each with its own characteristics – contribute to the diversity and the dynamic economic development of the department. In the Bresse agriculture and agro-industry are dominated by the cultivation of cereals, cattle breeding, milk and cheese production as well as poultry farming. In the Dombes, pisciculture assumes greater importance as does wine making in the Bugey. The high diversification of the department's industry is accompanied by a strong presence of the plastics sector in and around Oyonnax (so-called "Plastics Valley").
Due to its diverse industrial character and the cooperation of small and medium enterprises, Ain ranks among the departments with the fastest-growing economy in the country. Its unemployment rate lies far beneath the national and regional average. Besides the export-oriented SME's, several large enterprises, with a prominent position on national and international markets, have settled in the department.
Although looking ahead, Ain attaches nevertheless great importance to its historical and cultural heritage as illustrated by its gastronomy (restaurant of Georges Blanc in Vonnas), its annual poultry competitions in the Bresse ("the three glorious") and its tourism (346 classified monuments such as the famous church of Brou in Bourg-en-Bresse, 14 museums of France, eco-tourism and ski tourism).
History.
The first inhabitants settled in the territory of today's Ain about 15000 BC. The menhir of Pierrefiche in Simandre-sur-Suran dates from the mid-Neolithic era, in the fourth or third millennium BC; it is the sole standing stone in Burgundy. The late-second century BC Calendar of Coligny bears the longest surviving Gaulish inscription.
In the year 58 BC Julius Caesar's military action against the Helvetians advancing through Gaul on the territory of today's Ain marked the beginning of the Gallic Wars.
Under the Merovingians, the four historic regions of the modern département belonged to the Kingdom of Burgundy. In the beginning of the 6th century AD the diocese of Belley ("Bellicum") was created, the first bishropric in the region. Abbeys of the order of Saint Benedict were established in the valleys.
In 843 the Treaty of Verdun assigned the territories that comprise the Ain to the kingdom of Lothar I (Lotharingia). The first big fiefdoms ("seigneuries") emerge between 895 and 900 in Bâgé-le-Châtel, which formed the nucleus of the "pays" of Bresse, and in Coligny. Numerous castles were erected in a low rolling terrain that was not otherwise easily defended. In the 12th century the Romanesque architecture prospered.
In the 11th century the Counts of Savoy and Valromey settled in the region of Belley. In 1272, when Sibylle de Bâgé, sole heir, married Amadeus V, Count of Savoy, they added the Bresse to their domains, and – by the Treaties of Paris in 1355 – the territories of Dauphiné and Gex on the right bank of the Rhône. In the beginning of the 15th century almost the whole region of Ain is united under the house of Savoy. New monasteries are founded in the cities, churches are constructed or reshaped according to the Gothic style of architecture.
In the beginning of the 16th century – the Duchy of Savoy was at the peak of its power – Ain was inherited by Margaret of Habsburg, the widow of Philibert II, Duke of Savoy. In Brou she erected a church and a monastery in late-Gothic style. Bourg-en-Bresse became a bishop's see. After Margaret's death Francis I of France, a nephew of the Dukes of Savoy, claimed the Duchy for himself and conquered it in 1536; however, following a treaty concluded in 1559 Savoy, including the territory of Ain, was restored to the Duke of Savoy who immediately started fortifying it; when shortly thereafter, Henri IV reconquered the region, the citadel of Bourg remained impregnable. The Treaty of Lyon of 17 January 1601 ends finally the conflict. Ain now belonged to Burgundy.
In the 17th century sculpture, painting and literature prosper. During the 18th century streets and small industries emerge. On 28 March 1762 the Count of Eu, son of the Duke of Maine, cedes the region of Dombes to Louis XV.
In 1790, during the French Revolution, the departments of Ain and Léman are created. Ain is subdivided into nine districts, 49 cantons and 501 communes. The Revolution does not claim many victims in the department, but it destroys numerous valuable historical monuments. During the first French Consulate (1802) the districts are abolished. The Congress of Vienna dissolves the department of Léman and assigns the arrondissement Gex to the department of Ain.
During the French Revolution and the First Empire a large number of churches were destroyed, but in 1823 the diocese of Belley is refounded. The Curé of Ars becomes famous. During the Second Empire numerous churches are reconstructed, agriculture changes profoundly, and the railway expands.
Due to its distance from the frontline the department is spared the destruction of World War I (1914–1918). However, the majority of the vineyards can no longer be cultivated and disappear. Industrialization of the department starts in Oyonnax and Bellegarde. Construction of the Barrage de Génissiat starts in 1937.
World War II (1939–1945) vehemently strikes the department of Ain and takes its toll: 600 people are deported, half of them do not return. The monument of the Maquis in Cerdon, the memorial of the children of Izieu and the museum of the resistance and deportation in Nantua commemorate this tragic era.
In the second half of the 20th century the industrialization of the department proceeds, favored by a narrow street and railway network.
Geography and transport networks.
Ain is a department of geographic contrasts: In the north the plain of Bresse is bordered by the river Saône and rises slightly towards the north-east. In the south-east the territory of the Dombes has more than a thousand ponds and lakes. In the east the mountain chain of the southern Jura overlooks the plain of Bresse. The busy transport axes to Italy and Switzerland crisscross the valleys. The Gex region is separated from the rest of the department by the last eastern mountain chain of the Jura where the highest elevation in the department, the Crêt de la Neige (1720 m), can be found. Gex belongs geographically to the Lake Geneva basin.
The river Saône represents the western border of the department. It is fed by three smaller rivers: the Reyssouze (76 km), the Veyle (68 km) and the Chalaronne (52 km). The river Rhône represents the departments border in the east and the south. Its main tributaries are the Suran (50 km) and notably the river Ain (190 km) which is fed itself by 118 small rivers and creeks.
Ain is situated at the crossroads of a large national and international flow of commodities and is therefore an important transit region. More than 4000 km of transport routes serve the department. In addition to a well-developed transport network of former national roads, which were transferred to the department in 2007, the Department of Ain is crisscrossed by 220 km of highway.
For national and international flights the international airports of Lyon (Saint-Exupéry) and Geneva (Cointrin) are located within a rather short distance. The department of Ain disposes moreover of two waterways, the rivers Saône and Rhone, on which building material is shipped (gravel etc.). The most important harbour is situated in Jassans-Riottier at the river Saône.
Last but not least the railway network is of great importance, in particular the TGV-connections Paris-Geneva (with a stop in Bellegarde-sur-Valserine) and Paris-Lyon (passing by the Saône valley). A new TGV-connection through the Haut Bugey is under construction. It will reduce the actual travel time between Paris and Geneva by another 20 minutes. The regional TER (train and bus) network is important mainly as concerns the connection to Lyon.
Demographics.
The department of Ain is marked by very dynamic demographics. The population has grown from 471,019 inhabitants in 1990 to 515,207 in 1999 and 565,000 in 2006 (estimates of the French statistics office INSEE). This increase is primarily due to a positive migration balance testifying the department's attractiveness.
The average population density is 97 inhabitants/km² (Rhône-Alpes: 136; France: 112). While the Saône valley, the Côtière, Bourg-en-Bresse and the Gex region have a high density of population, only 16 inhabitants/km² live in the mountainous canton Brénod.
Economy.
General data.
With an unemployment rate of only 5% (compared to 7% in the region Rhône-Alpes and 8% in France), a close-meshed tissue of 11,500 small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and a fast-growing, export-oriented economy (main clients: Germany, Italy and Spain) the department of Ain is in economic terms one of the most dynamic regions in France.
Industry.
Despite its rural image the department of Ain is highly industrialised. In addition to a multitude of SME's several big enterprises of international reputation are situated in Ain (e.g. Roset-Cinna, Grosfillex, Volvo, Carrier, Smoby-Berchet, CIAT, Renault Trucks, Tréfileurope). With more than a third of all employees working in the industrial and public works sector Ain is holding the 6th rank of all departments as regards the degree of industrialisation and it is the most industrialised department within the region Rhône-Alpes. The small and medium enterprises contribute most to the industrial development of the department. While enterprises with more than 500 employees represent only 27% of all industrial employment, the businesses with less than 100 employees count for 47%.
Half of the industry's employees (apart from the public works sector) are working in one of the three branches of the department:
The plastics industry, which is located mainly around the city of Oyonnax, is a highly productive branch of the economy and enjoys an excellent reputation. The "Plastics Valley" comprises 10% of France's plastics industry which constitutes the highest concentration of plastics enterprises in Europe. The 349 enterprises which have settled here employ about 11,000 persons, more than a fourth of all employees of the tertiary sector (without public works). In the Oyonnax basin, three of four employments are directly or indirectly depending on the plastics industry.
The agricultural industry, mainly located in the Bresse, counts for more than 5,000 employees. It represents more than a fifth of the employees in the area of Bourg-en-Bresse who work in the meat industry and in tinned food factories. The pillars of the agro-industry are an efficient agriculture providing for a significant number of high quality products as well as the presence of several leading companies of this branch. The emblematic poultry industry in the Bresse employs only 350 persons.
In 1992 the City of Bourg-en-Bresse, the department of Ain and the local Chamber of Industry and Commerce founded the technology platform "Alimentec". Its tasks are, among others, applied research, technical support, technology transfer and the advanced technical education in the agro-industrial sector. The activities of Alimentec focus on three priorities: ventilation systems, plastics packing and applied hygiene.
The industrial tissue of the department of Ain is also a result of its metal processing (cables, wire drawing, electrical wires) and engineering industry (automobile industry, France's most important site for truck production) as shows the presence of several major companies in this sector (Tréfileurope, Alcatel Cables, Renault Trucks). Foundry, metal processing and electrical industry occupy approximately 8,200 employees. Due to the diversity of the activities of these industries and their dispersion over the whole department, polarisation effects similar to those in the plastics sector have not yet been observed.
Counting more than 12,900 employees, the public works sector represents a significant share of the department's economy. About a quarter of all industry employees are working in this sector. The future development of the building sector benefits from the department's economic and demographic growth.
Thanks to its vast forests (more than a third of the department's surface) the timber industry employed in September 2007 approximately 4,500 workers.
The nuclear industry represents another economic factor. The nuclear power plant in the Bugey produces about 4,2% of French electricity, employs more than 1,350 workers and secures moreover numerous employments in the enterprises of the supply chain. Every day between 300 and 1,000 external employees are working in the power plant. Its importance for the local economy can not be underestimated.
Ain disposes finally of several industrial parks. Apart from the aforementioned Plastics Valley and numerous smaller business parks which have been founded by local initiatives the large industrial park of the plain of Ain has to be mentioned. With 700 ha this park will certainly become a centre for heavy industries in the region Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes.
Agriculture.
The diversified agriculture (cattle and poultry breeding, milk and milk products, cereals, vegetables and viticulture) generates products of national and international reputation. In particular have to be mentioned the Bresse poultries ("volaille de Bresse"), the mold cheese ("Bleu") of Gex, Grièges and the Bresse, carps and sturgeons of the Dombes region as well as the wine of the Bugey.
The total number of farms in the department amounts to 5,170, including 2,750 full-time farms. During the previous 25 years the number of farms has steadily diminished. While there were 14 600 farms in 1979, only 11,320 were counted in 1988 and 6,320 in 2000. The total farming surface of the department amounts to 268,361 ha, containing 150,917 ha arable farm land and 118,000 plant cultures (range land, viticulture, fruit meadows, tree nurseries). The value of the departments agricultural production reaches 545 million €. 52% of this amount (274 million €) are allotted to animal products (cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry, carp, milk) and 44% (240 million €) concern crop (cereals, oil plants, wine, vegetables, flowers).
Commerce.
The commercial sector comprises 5,861 enterprises including 717 wholesalers and distributors (12,2%), 539 automobile dealers and garages as well as 1,643 retailers and repair businesses (28%) (source: Chamber of Industry and Commerce of Ain, 2006).
With a total of 22,973 employees and 9,000 self-employed persons the commercial sector contributes significantly to the overall employment in the department (source: Chamber of Industry and Commerce of Ain, 2006).
More than three thirds of the expenses of the private households amounting to 4,4 billion € per year are feeding the commercial businesses inside the department which stand their ground vis-à-vis external competition.
Services.
The strongly expanding services sector represents 46,6% of all enterprises and about 55 000 employees (source: Chamber of Industry and Commerce of Ain, 2006). Since 2003 the services branch employs more people than any other economic sector. Within the sector, services for enterprises represent 32,2% of the employees. Consulting and IT-services are of growing importance. Educational services as well as health and social services are also sought after. They represent about a quarter of all employees in the services sector.
Handcraft.
More than 9,000 handcraft businesses in the department of Ain highlight the particular economic importance of this sector. The handcraft, which employs approximately 29,000 persons has always been an essential element of the local economy. Within the sector, the production is of particular importance, followed by the construction, the services and the alimentary sector.
Tourism.
In economic terms tourism in the department of Ain means 300 million € of business volume and 10,000 direct jobs as well as another 10,000 indirect employments. In December 2006 2,9% of the department's employment was related to the tourist sector (source: Committee for Tourism in the Department of Ain, 2006).
In 2006 700,000 tourists visited the sites of interest in the department (museums, castles, religious monuments, gardens and caves). During the winter 2006/2007 winter sports activity was strongly restrained by the lack of snow. The number of daily skiing tourists amounted to 238,000 (180,500 for alpine skiing and 57,000 for cross-country skiing). The previous average amounted to 465,000 daily tourists per winter.
The angling and cycling tourism (27 circuits with altogether more than 1,500 km) attracts numerous visitors each year. The tourist infrastructure is good and divers. The hotel and hospitality sector counts about 1,100 establishments (hotels, camping grounds, bed and breakfast (so-called "gîtes"), holiday apartments, guest rooms etc.). Their joined capacity amounts to 40,850 beds. During the season 2006 2.5 million nights have been passed in the department compared to 2.7 million in 2002 (source: Committee for Tourism in the Department of Ain, 2006). 15,000 hunters are registered in the departments, 3,000 to 4,000 of whom hunt in the Dombes, one of the best hunting regions for water birds in France.
Research and higher education.
Several colleges and research institutions which are situated in Bourg-en-Bresse and Bellignat have settled in the department of Ain. In the Centre for University Studies which, has been relocated from the University Jean Moulin Lyon III to Bourg-en-Bresse, 540 students pursue their studies in 6 different branches : 4 "DEUG" (diplôme d’études universitaires générales = 2 years of studies) in law, modern foreign languages (English-German; English-Spanish), economic and social administration and business administration as well as a "Licence" (= 3 years of studies) and a "Maîtrise" (= 4 years, corresponds to the master's degree) in law (the "Maîtrise" with a specialisation in commercial and trade law).
Altogether 700 students are attending courses at Alimentec, the research and technology centre for applied nutritional sciences located in Bourg-en-Bresse (faculties: biology, energy sciences, informatics and biotechnology), or are qualified by the commercial college of the Chamber of Industry and Commerce in Bourg-en-Bresse. Furthermore, a branch of the Lyon faculty of education is situated in Bourg-en-Bresse providing 450 places for future school teachers.
In Bellignat, in the heart of the Plastics Valley, a polytechnic university was founded in 1992 which is placed under the direct control of the Ministry of youth, education and research. The Ecole Supérieure de Plasturgie provides 140 places for future plastics engineers and disposes of a pluridisciplinary research laboratory which qualifies advanced students (notably PhD students).
Although it is headquartered just across the border in Geneva, Switzerland, most of CERN's Large Hadron Collider lies in parts of several communes in the Arrondissement of Gex in Ain.
Administration and Representatives.
Administrative organisation.
The department of Ain consists of 4 arrondissements, 23 cantons and 419 communes.
The biggest cities are Bourg-en-Bresse (40,300 inhabitants), Oyonnax (23,200 inhabitants), Ambérieu-en-Bugey (12,600 inhabitants) and Bellegarde-sur-Valserine (11,400 inhabitants) (estimates INSEE, 2006).
Conseil départemental (Departemental Council).
The President of the Departemental Council is Damien Abad (UMP) since the French departemental elections, 2015.
Representatives in the National Assembly and the Senate.
According to its five constituencies, the département of Ain sends five representatives to the French National Assembly. All of them are members of the right-wing The Republicans (formerly UMP). Apart from former departmental President Charles de La Verpillière (2nd), the others are Xavier Breton (1st), Étienne Blanc (3rd), Michel Voisin (4th) and Damien Abad (5th).
The Senators from the Ain are Sylvie Goy-Chavent (UDI), Rachel Mazuir (PS) and Patrick Chaize (The Republicans).

</doc>
<doc id="83169" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83169" title="Aisne">
Aisne

Aisne () is a French department in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais-Picardie region of northern France. It is named after the river Aisne.
Geography.
The department of Aisne is surrounded by the French departments of Nord, Somme, Oise, Ardennes, and Seine-et-Marne and borders Belgium to the northeast. The Aisne River crosses the area from east to west, where it joins the Oise River. The Marne forms part of the southern boundary of the department with the department of Seine-et-Marne. The southern part of the department is the geographical region known as "la Brie poilleuse", a drier plateau known for its dairy products and Brie cheese.
According to the 2003 census, the forested area of the department was 123,392 hectares, or 16.6% for an average metropolitan area of 27.4%.
The landscape is dominated by masses of rock which often have steep flanks. These rocks appear all over the region, but the most impressive examples are at Laon and the Chemin des Dames ridge.
The principal cities in Aisne are :
See also: List of the communes of the Aisne department and Brie.
Hydrography.
The Scheldt (which takes its source near Le Catelet), the Aisne, the Marne, the Ourcq, the Vesle, the Somme (which rises in Fonsommes), the Oise, and the Serre. In the south of the department, there is the "Surmelin", the Verdonnelle, and the "Dhuys" (this river is channeled into the Dhuis Aqueduct, 131 km long, to supply drinking water to Paris since 1 October 1865 and also more recently the Leisure Park of Marne-la-Vallée).
The department is also crossed by numerous canals (e.g. the Canal of Saint-Quentin, 93 km).
Railways.
The county is crossed by three railway lines from Paris: the first two from the Gare du Nord and the third from the Gare de l'Est:
In 1873, the department of Aisne had 10 railway companies with a total length of 382 km.
Climate.
There is an average of 500 to 750 mm precipitation annually.
Weather Data for Saint Quentin - Roupy
History.
Aisne is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created from parts of the former provinces of Île-de-France (Laon, Soissons, Noyon,and Valois), Picardy (Thiérache Vermandois), and Champagne (Brie,and Omois).
Most of the old growth forests in the area were destroyed during battles in World War I. The French offensive against the Chemin des Dames in spring 1917 is sometimes referred to as the "Second Battle of the Aisne".
Economy.
Agriculture dominates the economy, especially cereal crops. Beet sugar is one of the most important industrial crops of the area. Silk, cotton, and wool weaving flourish in Saint-Quentin and other towns. Saint-Gobain is known for its production of mirrors, which started in the 17th century. Guise is the agricultural centre of the northern area of Aisne.
Politics.
The department is a mixture of rural areas and working-class towns. As a place of residence for some families working in Paris or Île-de-France, Aisne was for many years a department rather oriented to the left, with a majority on the General Council on the left since 1998, and the same for the majority of parliamentary seats representing the department in the National Assembly.
The smaller cities of the northern department such as Guise, Hirson, Vervins and the railway city of Tergnier are sources of support for left-wing parties.
The President of the General Council is the Socialist Yves Daudigny.
Administration.
Aisne is divided into five arrondissements and 21 cantons. The department has 805 communes and five parliamentary constituencies.
Demography.
The department of Aisne includes one medium-sized city (Saint-Quentin) and three small cities (Laon, Soissons and Château-Thierry) to which may be added the conglomeration formed by Chauny and Tergnier. There are many other agglomerations of an urban character because Aisne has been densely populated since before the 19th century. The villages are numerous and rather small.
Aisne lost some of its population in the second half of the 19th century, due to the rural exodus but this was limited by the industrial development in the north of the department (Saint-Quentin, Chaunois, Thiérache).
Greatly affected by the First World War, the department has seen its population grow slightly to the same level as in 1900. For thirty years, the industrial decline has caused stagnation of the population (526,346 in 1968, 535,489 in 1999). Only the south-west of the department, close to the Paris conurbation, has seen much population growth.
Tourism.
The boat tours relates in part to the Canal de Saint-Quentin with its electric towage and two tunnels (Lesdins and Riqueval/Vendhuile).
In 2007, a large infrastructure for tourist accommodation, the Center Parcs, was built on the Lake of Ailette, close to many tourist attractions such as the Cathedral of Laon, the Chemin des Dames and the Château de Coucy.
Among the many places to explore are:
Culture.
During World War I a number of significant architectural monuments were destroyed. Of the buildings that survived, the medieval churches in Laon, Braine, and Urcel are the most significant. The ruined castle of La Ferté-Milon escaped further damage during the war. Of the castles that survived, some were used as prisons, such as the Castle of Vadancourt, near Saint-Quentin (500 prisoners).
It is thought that the Aisne River was the birthplace of the trench warfare seen in the First World War. The British Expeditionary Force (BEF) had initial early successes driving the Germans back to the Aisne River; the German troops dug in and managed to hold out against both British and French attacks. This German entrenchment was to mould the entire face of World War One as both sides began digging in and fortifying their positions. Thus began the stalemate that became a significant feature of the First World War.
Languages.
This linguistic variance probably explains the difficulty for residents south of Aisne to identify themselves as belonging to the Picardy region.
Second homes.
In 2008, the department had 4.1% of second homes. This table shows the main communes of Aisne that have second homes which occasionally exceed 10% of total housing.
Source:

</doc>
<doc id="83170" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83170" title="Agamedes">
Agamedes

In Greek mythology, Agamedes (, "Agamēdēs") was a son of Erginus (or, according to some traditions, the son of Stymphalus and grandson of Arcas). He was father of Cercyon by Epicaste, who also brought to him a stepson, Trophonius, who was by some believed to be a son of Apollo. According to others, Agamedes was a son of Apollo and Epicaste, or of Zeus and Iocaste, and father of Trophonius. In the most common accounts, Trophonius was his brother.
The two brothers are said to have distinguished themselves as architects, especially in building temples and palaces. They built Apollo's temple housing the oracle of Delphi. A tradition mentioned by Cicero states that Agamedes and Trophonius, after having built this temple, prayed to the god to grant them in reward for their labor what was best for men. The oracle told the brothers to do whatsoever they wished for six days and, on the seventh, their greatest wish would be granted. They did and were found dead on the seventh day. The saying "those whom the gods love die young" comes from this story.
They also built a treasury of Hyrieus, king of Hyria in Boeotia. The scholiast on Aristophanes gives a somewhat different account from Charax of Pergamum, and makes them build the treasury for King Augeas. The story about this treasury in Pausanias bears a great resemblance to that which Herodotus relates of the treasury of the Egyptian king Rhampsinitus. In the construction of the treasury of Hyrieus, Agamedes and Trophonius contrived to place one stone in such a manner that it could be taken away outside, and thus formed an entrance to the treasury, without anybody perceiving it. Agamedes and Trophonius constantly robbed the treasury; and the king, seeing that locks and seals were uninjured while his treasures were constantly decreasing, set traps to catch the thief. Agamedes caught in one of these snares, and Trophonius cut off his head to keep Agamedes's identity secret.
After this, Trophonius was immediately swallowed up by the earth. On this spot there was afterwards, in the grove of Lebadeia, the so-called cave of Agamedes, with a column by the side of it. Here also was the oracle of Trophonius, and those who consulted it first offered a ram to Agamedes and invoked him.
The question as to whether the story about the Egyptian treasury is derived from Greece, or whether the Greek story was an importation from Egypt, has been answered by modern scholars in both ways; but Müller has rendered it very probable that the tradition took its rise among the Minyans, was transferred from them to Augeas, and was known in Greece long before the reign of Psammetichus I, during which the intercourse between the two countries was opened.

</doc>
<doc id="83171" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83171" title="Laon">
Laon

Laon () is the capital city of the Aisne department in Picardy, northern France. its population was of 25,317.
History.
Early history.
The holy district of Laon, which rises a hundred metres above the otherwise flat Picardy plain, has always held strategic importance. In the time of Julius Caesar there was a Gallic village named Bibrax where the Remis (inhabitants of the country round Reims) had to meet the onset of the confederated Belgae. Whatever may have been the precise locality of that battlefield, Laon was fortified by the Romans, and successively checked the invasions of the Franks, Burgundians, Vandals, Alans and Huns. At that time it was known as "Alaudanum" or "Lugdunum Clavatum".
Archbishop Remigius of Reims, who baptised Clovis, was born in the Laonnais, and it was he who, at the end of the fifth century, instituted the bishopric of Laon. Thenceforward Laon was one of the principal towns of the kingdom of the Franks, and the possession of it was often disputed. Charles the Bald had enriched its church with the gift of very numerous domains. In about 847 the Irish philosopher John Scotus Eriugena appeared at the court of Charles the Bald, and was appointed head of the palace school. Eriugena spent the rest of his days in France, probably at Paris and Laon.
After the fall of the Carolingians Laon took the part of Charles of Lorraine, their heir, and Hugh Capet only succeeded in making himself master of the town by the connivance of the bishop, who, in return for this service, was made second ecclesiastical peer of the kingdom.
Early in the twelfth century the communes of France set about emancipating themselves, and the history of the commune of Laon is one of the richest and most varied. Anselm of Laon's school for theology and exegesis rapidly became the most famous in Europe. The citizens had profited by a temporary absence of Bishop Gaudry to secure from his representatives a communal charter, but he, on his return, purchased from the king of France the revocation of this document, and recommenced his oppressions. The consequence was a revolt, in which the episcopal palace was burnt and the bishop and several of his partisans were put to death on 25 April 1112. The fire spread to the cathedral, and reduced it to ashes. Uneasy at the result of their victory, the rioters went into hiding outside the town, which was anew pillaged by the people of the neighbourhood, eager to avenge the death of their bishop.
The king alternately intervened in favour of the bishop and of the inhabitants till 1239. After that date the liberties of Laon were no more contested till 1331, when the commune was abolished. During the Hundred Years' War it was attacked and taken by the Burgundians, who gave it up to the English, to be retaken by Charles VII after his coronation. Under the League, Laon took the part of the Leaguers, and was taken by Henry IV.
Modern history.
At the Revolution (1789) Laon permanently lost its rank as a bishopric. During the campaign of 1814, Napoleon tried in vain to dislodge Blücher and Bülow from it in the Battle of Laon.
In 1870, during the Franco-Prussian War, an engineer blew up the powder magazine of the citadel at the moment when the German troops were entering the town. Many lives were lost; and the cathedral and the old episcopal palace were damaged. It surrendered to a German force on 9 September 1870.
In the fall of 1914, during World War I, German forces captured the town and held it until the Allied offensive in the summer of 1918.
Geography.
Located in the middle of Aisne, Laon borders (from the north, clockwise) with the municipalities of Aulnois-sous-Laon, Barenton-Bugny, Chambry, Athies-sous-Laon, Bruyères-et-Montbérault, Vorges, Presles-et-Thierny, Chivy-lès-Étouvelles, Clacy-et-Thierret, Molinchart, Cerny-lès-Bucy, and Besny-et-Loizy. It is from Reims, from Amiens, and from Paris.
Sights.
The city contains numerous medieval buildings, including the cathedral Notre-Dame of Laon, dating mostly from the 12th and 13th centuries. The chapter-house and the cloister contain specimens of early 13th century architecture. The old episcopal palace, contiguous to the cathedral, is now used as a court-house. The front, flanked by turrets, is pierced by large pointed windows. There is also a Gothic cloister and an old chapel of two storeys, of a date anterior to the cathedral.
The church of St Martin dates from the middle of the 12th century. The old abbey buildings of the same foundation are now used as the hospital. The museum of Laon had collections of sculpture and painting. In its garden there is a chapel of the Templars belonging to the 12th century.
One of the oldest churches in the city is St John the Baptist, in the nearby neighborhood of Vaux-sous-Laon, which dates from the 11th through 13th centuries and is built in a mixture of Romanesque and Gothic styles.
Transportation.
The town has among the only fully automated municipal cable car system in the world, called the Poma 2000. It links the upper town (the historical centre, located on a plateau) with the lower town, has three stations and runs on rubber tyres. In contrast, the San Francisco cable car system is manually operated, and most other automated cable car systems have restricted operations within airports and hospitals, though another automated cable car called the Minimetrò may be found in Perugia.
The town's transport company TUL (Transports Urbains Laonnois) operates also the local bus routes
International relations.
Laon is twinned with:
Personalities.
Laon was the birthplace of:
In the media.
Laon is featured in the book "Pursuit of Passy" by David Moore Crook.

</doc>
<doc id="83172" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83172" title="Trophonius">
Trophonius

Trophonius (, "Trophōnios") was a Greek hero or daimon or god—it was never certain which one—with a rich mythological tradition and an oracular cult at Lebadaea in Boeotia.
Etymology and parallel cults.
The name is etymologically derived from τρέφω "trepho", "to nourish". Strabo and several inscriptions refer to him as Zeus Trephonios. Several other chthonic Zeuses are known from the Greek world, including Zeus Μειλίχιος "Meilikhios" ("honeyed" or "kindly" Zeus), and Zeus Χθόνιος "Chthonios" ("Zeus beneath-the-earth").
Similar constructions are also found in the Roman world: for example, a shrine at Lavinium in Lazio was dedicated to Aeneas under the title "Iuppiter Indiges" (Jupiter in-the-earth).
Trophonius in myth.
In Greek mythology, Trophonius was a son of Erginus. According to the Homeric Hymn to Apollo, he built Apollo's temple at the oracle at Delphi with his brother, Agamedes. Once finished, the oracle told the brothers to do whatsoever they wished for six days and, on the seventh, their greatest wish would be granted. They did and were found dead on the seventh day. The saying "those whom the gods love die young" comes from this story.
Alternatively, according to Pausanias they built a treasure chamber (with secret entrance only they knew about) for King Hyrieus of Boeotia. Using the secret entrance, they stole Hyrieus' fortune. He was aware but did not know who the thief was; he laid a snare. Agamedes was trapped in it; Trophonius cut off his head so that Hyrieus would not know who the body in the snare was. He then fled into the cavern at Lebadaea, and disappeared forever.
The cave of Trophonius was not discovered again until the Lebadaeans suffered a plague, and consulted the Delphic Oracle. The Pythia advised them that an unnamed hero was angry at being neglected, and that they should find his grave and offer him worship forthwith. Several unsuccessful searches followed, and the plague continued unabated until a shepherd boy followed a trail of bees into a hole in the ground. Instead of honey, he found a "daimon", and Lebadaea lost its plague while gaining a popular oracle.
The childless Xuthus in Euripides's "Ion" consults Trophonius on his way to Delphi.
Apollonius of Tyana, a legendary wise man and seer of Late Antiquity, once visited the shrine and found that, when it came to philosophy, Trophonius was a proponent of sound Pythagorean doctrines.
Plutarch's "De Genio Socratis" relates an elaborate dream-vision concerning the cosmos and the afterlife that was supposedly received at Trophonius's oracle.
Trophonius in cult.
Pausanias, in his account of Boeotia (9.39), relates many details about the cult of Trophonius. Whoever desired to consult the oracle would live in a designated house for a period of days, bathing in the river Herkyna and living on sacrificial meat. He would then sacrifice, by day, to a series of gods, including Cronus, Apollo, Zeus the king, Hera the Charioteer, and Demeter-Europa. At night, he would cast a black victim into a pit sacred to Agamedes, drink from two rivers called Lethe and Mnemosyne, and then descend into a cave. Here, most consultees were frightened out of their wits, and forgot the experience entirely upon coming up.
Afterward, the consultee would be seated upon a chair of Mnemosyne, where the priests of the shrine would record his ravings and compose an oracle out of them.
Trophonius in the classical tradition.
"To descend into the cave of Trophonios" became a proverbial way of saying "to suffer a great fright". This saying is alluded to in Aristophanes' "Clouds".
Several ancient philosophers, including Heraclides Ponticus, wrote commentaries on the cult of Trophonios that are now sadly lost. Trophonios has been of interest to classical scholars because the rivers of Lethe and Mnemosyne have close parallels with the Myth of Er at the end of Plato's Republic, with a series of Orphic funerary inscriptions on gold leaves, and with several passages about Memory and forgetting in Hesiod's Theogony. The Hellfire Club once constructed a "Cave of Trophonius" with obscene wall-paintings in which to conduct their revels. The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche calls himself a "Trophonios" in the preface to his "Daybreak", alluding to his labor in the underground of moral prejudices.

</doc>
<doc id="83173" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83173" title="Erginus">
Erginus

In Greek mythology, Erginus () was king of Minyan Orchomenus in Boeotia. He was the son of Clymenus, his predecessor, and Buzyge (or Budeia); his brothers were Arrhon, Azeus, Pyleus, and Stratius. Erginus avenged his father's death at the hands of the Thebans; he made war against Thebes, inflicting a heavy defeat. The Thebans were compelled to pay King Erginus a tribute of 100 oxen per year for twenty years. However, the tribute ended earlier than Erginus expected, when Heracles attacked the Minyan emissaries sent to exact the tribute. This prompted a second war between Orchomenus and Thebes, only this time Thebes (under the leadership of Heracles) was victorious, and a double tribute was imposed on the Orchomenians. Erginus was slain in battle according to the version of the story given by most ancient writers (e.g., the "Bibliotheca", Strabo, Eustathius). But according to Pausanias, Erginus was spared by Heracles and lived to a ripe old age, and even fathered two sons (Trophonius and Agamedes) on a younger woman.
Some authors identify him with Erginus, an Argonaut who piloted the "Argo" after Tiphys's death. Elsewhere, however, the Argonaut Erginus is said to be the son of Poseidon, and to have resided in the Carian city of Miletus, thus a distinct figure. Yet others suggested he was a son of Periclymenus.
Erginus was also the name of:

</doc>
<doc id="83175" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83175" title="Agelaus">
Agelaus

Agelaus or Agelaos (Ἀγέλαος) is, in Greek mythology, the name of various individuals.

</doc>
<doc id="83177" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83177" title="Portage Lakes">
Portage Lakes

The Portage Lakes are a group of glacial kettle lakes and reservoirs in Northeast Ohio. The name comes from an old Indian portage path that connected the Cuyahoga River flowing north to Lake Erie and the Tuscarawas River, a tributary of the Muskingum River, which flows south to the Ohio River. This proved advantageous for the Indians and early settlers as navigation from Lake Erie to the Ohio was possible with only an eight-mile portage. Portage Lakes State Park lies at one of the highest points of the state and on a major watershed divide in Ohio. Some water from the lakes reaches Lake Erie and some flows to the Ohio River.
There is an unincorporated community named Portage Lakes in Summit County, near Elevation: , in the area.
The area became an important trading post for settlers and Indians. It was a recognized landmark during the War of 1812, serving as a rendezvous point of American troops. The old Indian portage path was part of the ancient boundary between the Six Nations and the Western Indians.
The city of Akron was laid out in 1825 and was first settled by Irish laborers and others working on the Ohio and Erie Canal. Once the canal was completed, the town flourished. Several important industries brought prosperity to the area including stoneware potteries, sewer pipe manufacturing, the match industry and, most recently, the tire and rubber industry. At one time, the Blue Diamond Match Company in Akron used three million board feet (7,000 m³) of white pine lumber per year for the manufacture of its matches.
Several of the Portage Lakes were built as feeder reservoirs for the canals to maintain the required depth of . The lakes were used for this purpose until the canals were abandoned in 1913. The lakes were then used to meet the water needs of the local industries. Some portions of the remnant canals in the Akron area can still be boated.
The Ohio Department of Public Works maintained the canal lands for recreational purposes until 1949 when the Portage Lakes were transferred to the newly formed Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Parks and Recreation.

</doc>
<doc id="83178" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83178" title="Alcimede">
Alcimede

In Greek mythology, Alcimede (; ; "mighty cunning") was one of the matrilineal Minyan daughters, the daughter of Clymene, Minyas' daughter. She was the mother of Jason by Aeson, whom she met in the caves below Iolcus in Thessaly, a chthonic lair where the rightful king Aeson had been imprisoned by his evil half-brother Pelias.
The old story of Alcimede's son Jason and the quest for the golden fleece is most familiar from a late version, the "Argonautica" of Apollonius of Rhodes.
A hint of matrilineal descent in archaic times among the Boeotian Minyans of Greece, is in Apollonius' aside concerning Jason's heritage:
A further hint of archaic matrilineal descent is that Clymene's consort is offered in two versions: she was usually cast as the wife of Phylacus (son of Deioneus, son of Aeolus) or in some versions, Aeson was fathered by Cephalus, otherwise the consort of Procris. 
Along with Aeson, Alcimede was forced by the usurping Pelias to commit suicide. She hanged herself or else drank, along with her husband and the child Promachus, of bull's blood and so died.

</doc>
<doc id="83179" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83179" title="Aletes (son of Aegisthus)">
Aletes (son of Aegisthus)

In Greek mythology, Aletes () was the son of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra, the king and queen of Mycenae. He had two sisters: Erigone and Helen. When they were young, their parents were killed by Orestes, who was their half-brother and the son of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon (this was in revenge for Clytemnestra killing Agamemnon, which she did in revenge for Agamemnon killing their daughter Iphigenia). The infant Helen was also killed or at least died young.
In most accounts, Orestes leaves Mycenae after he kills his mother and is pursued by the Furies. He wanders, is purified, and eventually marries his cousin Hermione, who lives in Sparta (he is also said to have traveled to Crimea to visit Iphigenia, who in some stories miraculously survived her father's attempt to sacrifice her to Artemis).
Meanwhile, Aletes has come of age, and he assumes the throne at Mycenae. Orestes returns with troops, kills Aletes, and takes the throne. Orestes is said to have a son, Penthilus, with his half-sister Erigone, though stories differ as to whether this was by rape or if they married. Some say Erigone hanged herself.

</doc>
<doc id="83180" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83180" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers">
United States Army Corps of Engineers

The United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), also sometimes shortened to CoE is a U.S. federal agency under the Department of Defense and a major Army command made up of some 37,000 civilian and military personnel, making it one of the world's largest public engineering, design, and construction management agencies. Although generally associated with dams, canals and flood protection in the United States, USACE is involved in a wide range of public works throughout the world. The Corps of Engineers provides outdoor recreation opportunities to the public, and provides 24% of U.S. hydropower capacity.
The corps' mission is to "Deliver vital public and military engineering services; partnering in peace and war to strengthen our Nation's security, energize the economy and reduce risks from disasters."
Their most visible missions include:
History.
Early history.
The history of United States Army Corps of Engineers can be traced back to 16 June 1775, when the Continental Congress organized an army with a chief engineer and two assistants. Colonel Richard Gridley became General George Washington's first chief engineer; however, it was not until 1779 that Congress created a separate Corps of Engineers. One of its first tasks was to build fortifications near Boston at Bunker Hill. The first Corps of Engineers was mostly composed of French subjects who had been hired by General Washington from the service of Louis XVI.
The Corps of Engineers, as it is known today, came into existence on 16 March 1802, when President Thomas Jefferson signed the Military Peace Establishment Act whose aim was to "organize and establish a Corps of Engineers ... that the said Corps ... shall be stationed at West Point in the State of New York and shall constitute a military academy." Until 1866, the superintendent of the United States Military Academy was always an engineer officer. During the first half of the 19th century, West Point was the major and, for a while, the only engineering school in the country.
The General Survey Act of 1824 authorized the use of Army engineers to survey road and canal routes. That same year, Congress passed an "Act to Improve the Navigation of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers" and "to remove sand bars on the Ohio and planers, sawyers, and snags on the Mississippi" for which the Corps of Engineers was the responsible agency.
Formerly Separate Units.
Separately authorized on 4 July 1838, the U.S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers consisted only of officers and was used for mapping and the design and construction of federal civil works and other coastal fortifications and navigational routes. It was merged with the Corps of Engineers on 31 March 1863, at which point the Corps of Engineers also assumed the Lakes Survey District mission for the Great Lakes.
In 1841, Congress created the Lake Survey. The survey, based in Detroit, Mich., was charged with conducting a hydrographical survey of the Northern and Northwestern Lakes and preparing and publishing nautical charts and other navigation aids. The Lake Survey published its first charts in 1852.
In the mid-19th century, Corps of Engineers' officers ran Lighthouse Districts in tandem with U.S. Naval officers.
Civil War.
The Army Corps of Engineers played a significant role in the American Civil War. Many of the men who would serve in the top leadership in this institution were West Point graduates who rose to military fame and power during the Civil War. Some of these men were Union Generals George McClellan, Henry Halleck, George Meade, and Confederate generals Robert E. Lee, Joseph Johnston, and P.G.T. Beauregard. The versatility of officers in the Army Corps of Engineers contributed to the success of numerous missions throughout the Civil War. They were responsible for building pontoon and railroad bridges, forts and batteries, the destruction of enemy supply lines, and the construction of roads. The Union forces were not the only ones to employ the use of engineers throughout the war, and on 6 March 1861, once the South had seceded from the Union, among the different acts passed at the time, a provision was included that called for the creation of a Confederate Corps of Engineers.
The progression of the war demonstrated the South's disadvantage in engineering expertise; of the initial 65 cadets who resigned from West Point to accept positions with the Confederate Army, only seven were placed in the Corps of Engineers. To overcome this obstacle, the Confederate Congress passed legislation that gave a company of engineers to every division in the field; by 1865, they actually had more engineer officers serving in the field of action than the Union Army. The Army Corps of Engineers served as a main function in making the war effort logistically feasible. One of the main projects for the Army Corps of Engineers was constructing railroads and bridges, which Union forces took advantage of because railroads and bridges provided access to resources and industry. One area where the Confederate engineers were able to outperform the Union Army was in the ability to build fortifications that were used both offensively and defensively along with trenches that made them harder to penetrate. This method of building trenches was known as the zigzag pattern.
20th century.
From the beginning, many politicians wanted the Corps of Engineers to contribute to both military construction and works of a civil nature. Assigned the military construction mission on 1 December 1941 after the Quartermaster Department struggled with the expanding mission, the Corps built facilities at home and abroad to support the U.S. Army and Air Force. During World War II the mission grew to more than 27,000 military and industrial projects in a $15.3 billion mobilization program. Included were aircraft, tank assembly, and ammunition plants, camps for 5.3 million soldiers, depots, ports, and hospitals, as well as the Manhattan Project, and the Pentagon.
In civilian projects, the Corps of Engineers became the lead federal flood control agency and significantly expanded its civil works activities, becoming among other things, a major provider of hydroelectric energy and the country's leading provider of recreation; its role in responding to natural disasters also grew dramatically. In the late 1960s, the agency became a leading environmental preservation and restoration agency.
In 1944, specially trained army combat engineers were assigned to blow up underwater obstacles and clear defended ports during the invasion of Normandy. During World War II, the Army Corps of Engineers in the European Theater of Operations was responsible for building countless bridges,including the first and longest floating tactical bridge across the Rhine at Remagen, and building or maintaining roads vital to the Allied advance across Europe into the heart of Germany. In the Pacific theater, the "Pioneer troops" were formed, a hand-selected unit of volunteer Army combat engineers trained in jungle warfare, knife fighting, and unarmed jujitsu (hand-to-hand combat) techniques. Working in camouflage, the "Pioneers" cleared jungle and prepared routes of advance and established bridgeheads for the infantry as well as demolishing enemy installations.
Five commanding generals (chiefs of staff after the 1903 reorganization) of the United States Army held engineer commissions early in their careers. All transferred to other branches before rising to the top. They were Alexander Macomb, George B. McClellan, Henry W. Halleck, Douglas MacArthur, and Maxwell D. Taylor.
Notable dates and projects.
Occasional civil disasters, including the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, resulted in greater responsibilities for the Corps of Engineers. New Orleans is another example of this.
Organization.
Headquarters.
The Chief of Engineers and Commanding General of U.S. Army Corps of Engineers works under the civilian oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works). Three deputy commanding generals report to the chief of engineers, who have the following titles, deputy commanding general, deputy commanding general for civil and emergency operation, and deputy commanding general for military and international operations. The Corps of Engineers headquarters is located in Washington, D.C. The headquarters staff is responsible for Corps of Engineers policy and plans the future direction of all other USACE organizations. It comprises the executive office and 17 staff principals. USACE has two directors who head up Military Programs and Civil Works, Director of Military Programs and Director of Civil Works.
Divisions and districts.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is organized geographically into eight permanent divisions, one provisional division, one provisional district, and one research command reporting directly to the HQ. Within each division, there are several districts. Districts are defined by watershed boundaries for civil works projects and by political boundaries for military projects.
The Engineer Regiment.
U.S. Army Engineer units outside of USACE Districts and not listed below fall under the Engineer Regiment of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Army engineers include both combat engineers and support engineers more focused on construction and sustainment. The vast majority of military personnel in the United States Army Corps of Engineers serve in this Engineer Regiment. The Engineer Regiment is headquartered at Fort Leonard Wood, MO and commanded by the Engineer Commandant, currently a position filled by an Army Brigadier General from the Engineer Branch.
The Engineer Regiment includes the U.S. Army Engineer School (USAES) which publishes its mission as: Generate the military engineer capabilities the Army needs: training and certifying Soldiers with the right knowledge, skills, and critical thinking; growing and educating professional leaders; organizing and equipping units; establishing a doctrinal framework for employing capabilities; and remaining an adaptive institution in order to provide Commanders with the freedom of action they need to successfully execute Unified Land Operations.
Other USACE organizations.
There are several other organizations within the Corps of Engineers:
Mission areas.
Warfighting.
USACE provides support directly and indirectly to the warfighting effort. They build and help maintain much of the infrastructure that the Army and the Air Force use to train, house, and deploy troops. USACE built and maintained navigation systems and ports provide the means to deploy vital equipment and other material. Corps of Engineers Research and Development (R&D) facilities help develop new methods and measures for deployment, force protection, terrain analysis, mapping, and other support.
USACE directly supports the military in the battle zone, making expertise available to commanders to help solve and/or avoid engineering (and other) problems. Forward Engineer Support Teams, FEST-A's or FEST-M's, may accompany combat engineers to provide immediate support, or to reach electronically into the rest of USACE for the necessary expertise. A FEST-A team is an eight-person detachment; a FEST-M is approximately 36. These teams are designed to provide immediate technical-engineering support to the warfighter or in a disaster area. Corps of Engineers' professionals use the knowledge and skills honed on both military and civil projects to support the U.S. and local communities in the areas of real estate, contracting, mapping, construction, logistics, engineering, and management experience. This work currently includes support for rebuilding Iraq, establishing Afghanistan infrastructure, and supporting international and interagency services.
In addition, the work of almost 26,000 civilians on civil-works programs throughout USACE provide a training ground for similar capabilities worldwide. USACE civilians volunteer for assignments worldwide. For example, hydropower experts have helped repair, renovate, and run hydropower dams in Iraq in an effort to help get Iraqis to become self-sustaining.
Homeland security.
USACE supports the United States' Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) through its security planning, force protection, research and development, disaster preparedness efforts, and quick response to emergencies and disasters.
The CoE conducts its emergency response activities under two basic authorities — the Flood Control and Coastal Emergency Act (), and the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (). In a typical year, the Corps of Engineers responds to more than 30 Presidential disaster declarations, plus numerous state and local emergencies. Emergency responses usually involve cooperation with other military elements and Federal agencies in support of State and local efforts.
Infrastructure support.
Work comprises engineering and management support to military installations, global real estate support, civil works support (including risk and priorities), operations and maintenance of Federal navigation and flood control projects, and monitoring of dams and levees.
More than 67 percent of the goods consumed by Americans and more than half of the nation's oil imports are processed through deepwater ports maintained by the Corps of Engineers, which maintains more than of commercially navigable channels across the U.S.
In both its Civil Works mission and Military Construction program, the Corps of Engineers is responsible for billions of dollars of the nation's infrastructure. For example, USACE maintains direct control of 609 dams, maintains and/or operates 257 navigation locks, and operates 75 hydroelectric facilities generating 24% of the nation's hydropower and three percent of its total electricity. USACE inspects over 2,000 Federal and non-Federal levees every two years.
Four billion gallons of water per day are drawn from the Corps of Engineers' 136 multi-use flood control projects comprising of water storage, making it one of the United States' largest water supply agencies.
The 249th Engineer Battalion (Prime Power), the only active duty unit in USACE, generates and distributes prime electrical power in support of warfighting, disaster relief, stability and support operations as well as provides advice and technical assistance in all aspects of electrical power and distribution systems. The battalion deployed in support of recovery operations after 9/11 and was instrumental in getting Wall Street back up and running within a week. The battalion also deployed in support of post-Katrina operations.
All of this work represents a significant investment in the nation's resources.
Water resources.
Through its Civil Works program, USACE carries out a wide array of projects that provide coastal protection, flood protection, hydropower, navigable waters and ports, recreational opportunities, and water supply. Work includes coastal protection and restoration, including a new emphasis on a more holistic approach to risk management. As part of this work, USACE is the number one provider of outdoor recreation in the U.S., so there is a significant emphasis on water safety.
Army involvement in works "of a civil nature," including water resources, goes back almost to the origins of the U.S. Over the years, as the nation's needs have changed, so have the Army's Civil Works missions.
Major areas of emphasis include the following:
Environment.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers environmental mission has two major focus areas: restoration and stewardship. The Corps supports and manages numerous environmental programs, that run the gamut from cleaning up areas on former military installations contaminated by hazardous waste or munitions to helping establish/reestablish wetlands that helps endangered species survive. Some of these programs include Ecosystem Restoration, Formerly Used Defense Sites, Environmental Stewardship, EPA Superfund, Abandoned Mine Lands, Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program, Base Realignment and Closure, 2005, and Regulatory.
This mission includes education as well as regulation and cleanup.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has an active environmental program under both its Military and Civil Programs.
The Civil Works environmental mission that ensures all USACE projects, facilities and associated lands meet environmental standards. The program has four functions: compliance, restoration, prevention, and conservation. The Corps also regulates all work in wetlands and waters of the United States.
The Military Programs Environmental Program manages design and execution of a full range of cleanup and protection activities:
The following are major areas of environmental emphasis:
See also Environmental Enforcement below.
Operational facts and figures.
Summary of facts and figures as of 2007, provided by the Corps of Engineers:
Environmental Protection and Regulatory Program.
The Regulatory Program is authorized to protect the nation's aquatic resources. USACE evaluates permit applications for essentially all construction activities that occur in the Nation's waters, including wetlands. Two primary authorities granted to the Army Corps of Engineers by Congress fall under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899 (codified in Chapter 33, Section 403 of the United States Code) gave the Corps authority over navigable waters of the United States. As navigable waters are defined as "navigable waters of the United States are those waters that are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide and/or are presently being used, or have been used in the past, or may be susceptible for use to transport interstate or foreign commerce". Section 10 covers construction, excavation, or deposition of materials in, over, or under such waters, or any work that would affect the course, location, condition or capacity of those waters. Actions requiring Section 10 permits include structures (e.g., piers, wharfs, breakwaters, bulkheads, jetties, weirs, transmission lines) and work such as dredging or disposal of dredged material, or excavation, filling or other modifications to the navigable waters of the United States. The Coast Guard also has responsibility for permitting the erection or modification of bridges over navigable waters of the U.S.
Another of the major responsibilities of the Army Corps of Engineers is administering the permitting program under Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972. (aka "The Clean Water Act"). This Act authorized the Secretary of the Army to issue permits for the discharge of dredged and fill material in waters of the United States, including adjacent wetlands. The geographic extent of waters of the United States subject to Section 404 permits fall under a broader definition and include tributaries to navigable waters and adjacent wetlands. The engineers must first determine if the waters at the project site are jurisdictional and subject to the requirements of the Section 404 permitting program. Once jurisdiction has been established, permit review and authorization follows a sequence process that encourages avoidance of impacts, followed by minimizing impacts and, finally, requiring mitigation for unavoidable impacts to the aquatic environment. This sequence is described in the Section 404(b)(1) guidelines.
There are three types of permits issued by the Corps of Engineers: Nationwide, Regional General, and Individual. 80% of the permits issued are nationwide permits, which include 50 general type of activities for minimal impacts to waters of the United States, as published in the Federal Register. Nationwide permits are subject to a reauthorization process every 5 years, with the most recent reauthorization occurring in March 2012. To gain authorization under a nationwide permit, an applicant must comply with the terms and conditions of the nationwide permit. Select nationwide permits require preconstruction notification to the applicable Corps' district office notifying them of his or her intent, type and amount of impact and fill in waters, and a site map. Although the nationwide process is fairly simple, Corps' approval must be obtained before commencing with any work in waters of the United States. Regional general permits are specific to each Corps' district office. Individual permits are generally required for projects that impact greater than of waters of the United States. Individual permits are required for activities that result in more than minimal impacts to the aquatic environment.
Research.
The Corps of Engineers has two research organizations, the Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) and the Army Geospatial Center (AGC).
ERDC provides science, technology, and expertise in engineering and environmental sciences to support both military and civil/civilian customers. ERDC research support includes:
AGC coordinates, integrates, and synchronizes geospatial information requirements and standards across the Army and provides direct geospatial support and products to warfighters. See also Geospatial Information Officer.
Insignia.
The Corps of Engineers branch insignia, the Corps Castle, is believed to have originated on an informal basis. In 1841, cadets at West Point wore insignia of this type. In 1902, the Castle was formally adopted by the Corps of Engineers as branch insignia. The "castle" is actually the Pershing Barracks at the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York
A current tradition was established with the "Gold Castles" branch insignia of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, West Point Class of 1903, who served in the Corps of Engineers early in his career and had received the two pins as a graduation gift of his family. In 1945, near the conclusion of World War II, General MacArthur gave his personal pins to his Chief Engineer, General Leif J. Sverdrup. On 2 May 1975, upon the 200th anniversary of the Corps of Engineers, retired General Sverdrup, who had civil engineering projects including the landmark -long Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel to his credit, presented the Gold Castles to then-Chief of Engineers Lieutenant General William C. Gribble, Jr., who had also served under General MacArthur in the Pacific. General Gribble then announced a tradition of passing the insignia along to future Chiefs of Engineers, and it has been done so since.
Controversies.
Civil works.
Some of the Corps of Engineers' civil works projects have been characterized in the press as being pork barrel or boondoggles such as the New Madrid Floodway Project and the New Orleans flood protection. Projects have allegedly been justified based on flawed or manipulated analyses during the planning phase. Some projects are said to have created profound detrimental environmental effects and/or provided questionable economic benefit such as the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet in southeast Louisiana. Faulty design and substandard construction have been cited in the failure of levees in the wake of Hurricane Katrina that caused flooding of 80% of the city of New Orleans.
Review of Corps of Engineers' projects has also been criticized for its lack of impartiality. The investigation of levee failure in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina was sponsored by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) but funded by the Corps of Engineers and involved its employees.
Corps of Engineers projects can be found in all fifty states, and are specifically authorized and funded directly by Congress. Local citizen, special interest, and political groups lobby Congress for authorization and appropriations for specific projects in their area.
Senator Russ Feingold and Senator John McCain sponsored an amendment requiring peer review of Corps projects to the Water Resources Development Act of 2006, proclaiming "efforts to reform and add transparency to the way the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers receives funding for and undertakes water projects." A similar bill, the Water Resources Development Act of 2007, which included the text of the original Corps' peer review measure, was eventually passed by Congress in 2007, overriding Presidential veto.
Military construction.
A number of Army camps and facilities designed by the Corps of Engineers, including the former Camp O'Ryan in New York State, have reportedly had a negative impact on the surrounding communities. Camp O'Ryan, with its rifle range, has possibly contaminated well and storm runoff water with lead. This runoff water eventually runs into the Niagara River and Lake Ontario, sources of drinking water to millions of people. This situation is exacerbated by a failure to locate the engineering and architectural plans for the camp, which were produced by the New York District in 1949.
Greenhouse whistleblower suit.
Bunnatine "Bunny" Greenhouse, a formerly high-ranking official in the Corps of Engineers, won a lawsuit against the United States government in July 2011. Greenhouse had objected to the Corps accepting cost projections from KBR in a no-bid, noncompetitive, contract. After she complained, Greenhouse was demoted from her Senior Executive Service position, stripped of her top secret security clearance, and even, according to Greenhouse, had her office booby-trapped with a trip-wire from which she sustained a knee injury. A U.S. District court awarded Greenhouse $970,000 in full restitution of lost wages, compensatory damages, and attorney fees.

</doc>
<doc id="83181" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83181" title="Alphesiboea">
Alphesiboea

Alphesiboea was the name of several characters in Greek mythology:

</doc>
<doc id="83182" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83182" title="Althaea (mythology)">
Althaea (mythology)

Althaea or Althea (, "Althaía") was, in Greek mythology, the daughter of King Thestius and Eurythemis, and was sister to Leda, Hypermnestra, Iphiclus, Euippus. She was also the wife of Oeneus, king of Calydon, and mother of five sons, Meleager, Melanippe (one of the Meleagrids), Toxeus, Thyreus, Clymenus, and two daughters, Deianeira and Gorge. According to some writers, Meleager was the result of a liaison with the Greek god Ares, and Deianeira the progeny of Althaea and the god Dionysus.
Althaea is especially celebrated in ancient story about the fate of her son Meleager; they became the cause of each other’s deaths. When Meleager was born, the Moirai (the Fates) predicted he would only live until a brand, burning in the family hearth, was consumed by fire. 
In Aeschylus' "Libation Bearers" Althaea is mentioned by the Chorus of captive slaves, serving women of Clytemnestra, in a recollection of 'hatreds that stopped at nothing'.
Meleager grew to be a well-respected prince. One spring Oeneus sacrificed the first fruits of the seasons to all the gods, omitting Artemis by mistake. Enraged by the slight, Artemis sent a boar of unnatural size and strength to ruin the land of Calydon. Meleager was one of the warriors who hunted the boar, along with the famous huntress Atalanta and Althaea’s brothers. Meleager killed the boar, but gave the skin to Atalanta both because he had fallen in love with her and because she had landed the first blow on the animal. When Althaea's brothers, “thinking scorn that a woman should get the prize in the face of men, took the skin from her, alleging that it belonged to them by right of birth if Meleager did not choose to take it,” Meleager flew into a rage and killed both of his uncles. 
When Althaea learned what had happened, she retrieved the brand from where she had concealed it and placed the brand back upon the fire, killing him. Some say that she and Meleager’s wife Cleopatra later hanged themselves, others that she killed herself with a dagger.

</doc>
<doc id="83183" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83183" title="AC">
AC

AC, A.C. or Ac may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="83184" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83184" title="Meleager">
Meleager

In Greek mythology, Meleager (, ) was a hero venerated in his "temenos" at Calydon in Aetolia. He was already famed as the host of the Calydonian boar hunt in the epic tradition that was reworked by Homer.
Mythology.
Early life.
Meleager was the son of Althaea and the vintner Oeneus and, according to some accounts father of Parthenopeus and Polydora. 
When Meleager was born, the Moirai (the Fates) predicted he would only live until a brand, burning in the family hearth, was consumed by fire. Overhearing them, Althaea immediately doused and hid the brand .
Atalanta.
Oeneus sent Meleager to gather up heroes from all over Greece to hunt the Calydonian Boar that had been terrorizing the area, rooting up the vines, Oeneus having omitted Artemis at a festival in which he honored the other gods. In addition to the heroes he required, he chose Atalanta, a fierce huntress, whom he loved. According to one account of the hunt, when Hylaeus and Rhaecus, two centaurs, tried to rape Atalanta, Meleager killed them. Then Atalanta wounded the boar and Meleager killed it. He awarded her the hide since she had drawn the first drop of blood.
Meleager's brother Toxeus, the "archer", and Plexippus (Althaea's brother) grew enraged that the prize was given to a woman. Meleager killed them in the following argument. He also killed Iphicles and Eurypylus for insulting Atalanta. When Althaea found out that Meleager had killed her brother and one of her sons, Althaea placed the brand that she had stolen from the Fates (the one that the Fates predicted, once engulfed with fire, would kill Meleager) upon the fire, thus fulfilling the prophecy and killing Meleager, her own son. The women who mourned his death were turned into guineafowl (Meleagrides).
Argonaut.
Meleager is also mentioned as one of the Argonauts. In Hades, his is the only shade that does not flee Heracles, who has come after Cerberus. In Bacchylides' Ode V, Meleager is still in his shining armor, so formidable, in Bacchylides' account, that Heracles reaches for his bow to defend himself. Heracles is moved to tears by Meleager's account; Meleager has left his sister Deianira unwedded in his father's house, and entreats Heracles to take her as bride; here Bacchylides breaks off his account of the meeting, without noting that in this way Heracles in the Underworld chooses a disastrous wife.
Personal life.
Meleager married Cleopatra, daughter of Idas and Marpessa. They had a daughter, Polydora, who became the bride of Protesilaus, who left her bed on their wedding-night to join the expedition to Troy.
Influences.
Among the Romans, the heroes assembled by Meleager for the Calydonian hunt provided a theme of multiple nudes in striking action, to be portrayed frieze-like on sarcophagi.
Meleager's story has similarities with the Scandinavian "Norna-Gests þáttr".
In Rick Riordan's book series, The Heroes of Olympus, Frank Zhang, Son of Mars, is told by Juno that he will only live as long as a piece of firewood has burnt to ash. This is most likely inspired by Meleager's curse.
<br>

</doc>
<doc id="83186" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83186" title="Toxeus">
Toxeus

In Greek mythology, the name Toxeus (Τοξεύς) refers to:

</doc>
<doc id="83187" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83187" title="Plexippus">
Plexippus

In Greek mythology, Plexippus or Plexippos (Πλήξιππος) is a name that refers to:

</doc>
<doc id="83188" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83188" title="Allier">
Allier

Allier (; is a French department located in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region of central France named after the river Allier. Moulins is the prefecture and the INSEE and Post Code is 03.
The inhabitants of the department are known as "Elavérins" or "Elavérines"
Geography.
Allier department is composed of almost all of the former Duchy of Bourbonnais. It is part of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region and borders the departments of Cher, Nièvre, Saône-et-Loire, Loire, Puy-de-Dome, and Creuse.
The department also includes three spa towns:
Neris-les-Bains is the only town in the department with more than 10% of second homes: 504 out of 1,800 homes in 1999.
Relief.
Bourbonnais bocage covers most of the western and central parts of the department (including the Forest of Tronçais), followed by the Bourbonnais "Sologne" in the east north-east, the Bourbonnais Mountain (near Vichy) which is the highest point of Bourbonnais together with Montoncel (peaking at 1,287 metres), and finally in the south of the department, the Bourbonnais "Limagne", which extends from Varennes to Gannat, and is the breadbasket of the department.
To the north and just over 500 metres above sea level, the Bourbonnais Bocage occupies one-third of the department, with two parts: the centre and the west (for the part between the Val de Cher and western boundaries of the territory). The bocage is especially remarkable for its rich forests and woodlands including the famous Forest of Tronçais but also the forests of Moladier Bagnolet, Civrais, Soulongis, Grosbois, Dreuille, Lespinasse and Suave.
Almost all of the southern area consists of Combrailles which is sometimes called High Bourbonnais, in an area that goes beyond the departmental boundaries of Creuse and Puy-de-Dôme. This area of the department rises to 778 metres at Bosse. The rivers Sioule, Bouble, and Cher have carved the most picturesque gorges in Allier.
To the east, between the Val d'Allier and the borders of Nièvre and Saône-et-Loire, the Bourbonnais Sologne has a nice balance between pastures, crops, woods and ponds: the balance between agriculture and semi-wilderness constituting a very favorable setting for fauna and flora.
In its southern extension, the Bourbonnais Mountain rises from the Puy Saint-Ambroise (442 metres) near Saint-Léon and then extends to the massif of Assisi and the Black Forest at the edge of Puy-de-Dome and Loire which is marked by the Puy de Montoncel (1,287 metres) - the highest point in Allier.
Commonly grouped under the name of "Val d'Allier", the Limagne and Forterre extend on both sides of the river between Vichy and Saint-Pourçain-sur-Sioule with an essential quality of fertility. Limogne, together with Sioule and Allier, is part of the Gannat / Escurolles / Saint-Pourçain triangle while Forterre covers the Canton of Varennes-sur-Allier ending near Jaligny.
Climate.
A transition zone in the middle of the country, Allier is actually a free zone between north and south. The department is wide open to Atlantic influences and it enjoys a mild and humid climate dominated by westerly winds which helps a little to differentiate it from other parts of Auvergne. The weather variances coincide with the diversity of Bourbonnais territory such as: flat regions, low altitude Bourbonnais Sologne and large floodplains, the hill country, the average altitude of 300 to 600 metres, the central part of the department, and the semi-mountainous southern townships bordering the Combraille and Forez between 700 and 1,200 metres.
There are two periods of maximum precipitation in June and October and a minimum in January and February with average of 694 millimetres in Montluçon (altitude 207 metres), 763 mm in Moulins (245 m) 778 mm in Vichy (251 m) 791 mm in Lapalisse (285 m). and nearly 1,200 mm in Assisi (1,050 m). As noted Atlantic winds are dominant from the west, northwest, or southwest. The influence of topography, especially in the valleys of Cher and Allier, also contributes to the south and north variance.
History.
The history of Allier corresponds to the Duchy of Bourbon (Bourbonnais) with which it shares almost the entire territory.
Allier is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created from parts of the former provinces of Auvergne and Bourbonnais.
In 1940, the government of Marshal Philippe Pétain chose the town of Vichy as its capital. Vichy also became the department's second sub-prefecture in 1940, since the department now found itself split by the demarcation line between the occupied and (relatively, at least initially) free zones of France.
Demography.
On 1 January 1997 the population of Allier was estimated at 357,100 inhabitants which represented an average density of 50 people/km². Many areas have a density less than 20 people/km².
Since the early 1980s Allier has faced many demographic handicaps. The ratio of older people is important and with low fertility rates the natural growth is negative. Meanwhile, net migration has become very negative.
At 1 January 2009 the legal population was 343,046 inhabitants. The fertility rate was slightly lower than the national average in 2007 but nevertheless would renew of the Allier population if not for the lack of jobs leading to the exodus of young people to more favourable employment areas thus confirming a negative net migration.
Allier has three major cities, Montlucon, Vichy, and Moulins by size. The rest of the department includes some small towns and villages scattered mainly along the rivers. The few villages are far from each other and it is generally a sparsely populated department. Until the end of the 19th century, however, the population was increasing through the development of its cities (industries at Montlucon and Moulins, spas in Vichy) compensated by the rural exodus. The department then passed 420,000 inhabitants. After the population losses of the First World War the population stabilized and grew a little again in the 1960s. Since then, due to the continuing rural exodus and especially the decline of old industries, the population has decreased and aged steadily from 386,533 inhabitants in 1968 to 343,046 in 2009.
The evolution of the number of inhabitants is known through the population censuses conducted in the communes of the department since 1793. From the 21st century, a census of communes with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants is held every five years, unlike larger towns that have a sample survey every year.
Politics and administration.
Prefecture.
Jean-Luc Marx, the prefect of Lot, was named the prefect of Allier on 1 June 2011, replacing Pierre Monzani who was appointed Prefect of Seine-et-Marne on 25 May 2011.
Pierre Monzani had been prefect of Allier since 14 January 2009. Born on 12 May 1958 in Villerupt (Meurthe-et-Moselle), Pierre Monzani holds a civil service "agrégation" in history and a "DEA" in history and civilization. A former student of the Ecole Normale Superieure (Saint-Cloud) and of École nationale d'administration (ENA), since August 2006 he has been director of INHES (National Institute of Advanced Security Studies).
Two senators.
In the Senate elections in 2008 the left took one of the two Senate seats in Allier formerly held by the right. Mireille Schurch, PCF Mayor of Lignerolles, was elected:
Four Members of Parliament.
The elections of 2007 returned three Socialists ( Bernard Lesterlin for Montlucon, Jean Mallot for Saint-Pourçain, and Guy Chambefort for Moulins) and one PRG (Gerard Charasse for Vichy).
Departmental Assembly.
In the local elections of March 2008, Allier department was won by a majority of the left. The URB (Republican Union for Bourbonnais, right) had headed the department between 2001 and 2008, with the last year with only one vote majority. From 2008 the left coalition was in control also with a majority of one vote (10 PC, 6 PS, 2 PRG, 18 seats in total), facing 17 councilors from the URB. Allier Council is chaired by a Communist, Jean-Paul Dufregne as for Val-de-Marne department in Île-de-France. The General Council of Allier has also been led - after decentralization - by a communist: Jean-Claude Mairal (1998-2001). The loss of his mandate was included in a national dynamic of victory of the right.
Three major cities.
The three major cities of Allier are run by mayors of the right who were re-elected in the 2008 municipal elections in the first round by Daniel Dugléry in Montluçon and in the second round for Pierre-André Périssol in Moulins, and Claude Malhuret in Vichy.
History of the left in Allier.
The department was distinguished by communist votes in early voting which continued until after the Second World War with the two major political parties of the left being the PCF and the SFIO which have now become the Socialist Party.
The small town of Commentry has the distinction of being the first town in France to elect a socialist mayor in 1882: Christophe Thivrier. Another local figure, Pierre Brizon, an MP in 1910, was typically a member for sharecroppers.
Earlier, Ledru-Rollin achieved a very good result in 1848 (14%) with Democratic and socialist candidates in the following year (44% of the vote, against 35% for all of France). Similarly, resistance to the coup of 2 December 1851 was important after an attempt to support the uprising in June 1849. Republicans were in the majority in 1876 and held all six parliamentary seats. After neighbouring results of 15% of enrolled voters from 1893 to 1906 the Socialists rose to 31% of enrolled votes (42% of those cast) in 1910 and maintained this in 1914
Allier remains a land of rural communism (still 14.66% in the 2004 regional elections - the second best result for the party after Somme) in a sometimes difficult cohabitation with the Socialist Party.
For the causes of their success it may be noted that historically Allier has been a department where vast properties were combined into sharecropping. Sharecropping only spread in the 15th century and was not disturbed by the sale of national assets to the Revolution. In the 19th century large properties (100 hectares or more) occupied about half of the land, and even more than 70% in the north of the department. In the south, small properties dominate.
Sharecropping continued as a form of land development and it involved 40% of the land in 1892 (only 7% overall for France). Adverse conditions made sharecroppers promote the creation of rural unions between 1904 and 1911 (the third greatest number per department in France after Hérault and Landes). Despite poor results the mobilization was important and promoted the election of left-wing candidates.
Economy.
The industries most represented are the food industry, wood and furniture, chemical, foundries and metalworking, rubber, machinery and electrical equipment, automotive, weaponry, textiles, building, and the spas.
According to studies by INSEE agriculture would be about 7 to 8% of departmental gross domestic product.
Tourism.
Marked by the imprint of the Dukes of Bourbon, Allier is a land of rivers, bocage, and small mountains. Landscapes such as Bourbonnais bocage, the gorges of the Sioule, and the Forest of Tronçais are places suitable for the practice of outdoor activities: hiking, fishing, and white water sports. Hydrotherapy is one of the leading sectors of Bourbonnais tourism with the international spa at Vichy.
This nature preserve also features a multitude of castles (over 500), Romanesque churches and beautiful houses much of which is the heritage of the Bourbons. Bourbon cuisine reflects the history of the province and provides quality products: Pâté aux pommes de terre, Charolais beef, wines from Saint-Pourçain AOC, Charroux mustard, and Vichy pastilles.
Among the tourist sites to visit are:
Gastronomy and viticulture.
The pâté aux pommes de terre is one of the specialities of the Allier, as well as of the neighboring Limousin region. The Allier River is one of the rare places in Southern Europe where the freshwater grayling ("Thymallus thymallus"), known in French as "ombre des rivières", occurs in a natural habitat. This fish is much valued in French gastronomy for its fine and delicate texture and is best eaten along with a light wine.
Saint-Pourçain AOC wine is produced in Allier and the oak from the forest of Tronçais is one of the most favoured in the construction of wine barrels.
Second homes.
In 2008 the department had 7.5% of second homes. This table shows the main communes of Allier with second homes and which occasionally exceed 10% of total housing.
The department has attracted many foreigners, English, Belgian, Swiss, and Dutch. They have acquired many second homes by renovating and bringing unmatched cultural diversity to Allier.
We therefore find many communes have become "European" such as Pouzy-Mésangy which today has many English and Swiss residents.
Culture.
Regional languages.
Allier is traversed by the border between Occitan and French.
For a long period the people of Allier did not speak standard French but one of the following local languages:
Qualifications:

</doc>
<doc id="83190" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83190" title="Hautes-Alpes">
Hautes-Alpes

Hautes-Alpes (; ) is a department in southeastern France named after the Alps mountain range.
History.
Hautes-Alpes is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It consists of the southeast of the former province of Dauphiné and the north of Provence.
At the time when the department was created, the two mountain communes of La Grave and Villar-d'Arêne successfully campaigned to be included in Hautes-Alpes and not in the neighbouring department of Isère to which they had originally been assigned. This was because they hoped to benefit from the relative autonomy and certain fiscal privileges enjoyed by the region since the fourteenth century under the terms of the Statute of the Briançon Escartons.
Napoleon passed through Gap when he returned to reclaim France after his exile on Elba using what is now known as Route Napoléon.
Geography.
The department is surrounded by the following French departments: Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, :Drôme, Isère, and Savoie. Italy borders it on the east.
Hautes-Alpes is located in the Alps mountain range. The average elevation is over 1000 m, and the highest elevation is over 4000 m. The only three sizable towns are Gap, Briançon, and Embrun, which was the subprefecture until 1926.
The third highest commune in all of Europe is the village of Saint-Véran. Gap and Briançon are the highest prefecture and subprefecture in France.
The following rivers flow through the department:
The Durance has been dammed to create one of the largest artificial lakes in Western Europe: the Lac de Serre-Ponçon.
The Queyras valley is located in the eastern part of the department and is noted by many as being an area of outstanding beauty.
Demographics.
The inhabitants of the department are called "Haut-Alpins".
The extremely mountainous terrain explains the sparse population, which was originally about 120,000. It changed little during the 19th century, but fell to about 85,000 after World War I. Thanks in large part to tourism, the population has risen from 87,436 in 1962 to 121,419 in 1999, principally in the town of Gap.
Politics.
The President of the General Council is Jean-Yves Dusserre of the Union for a Popular Movement.
Tourism.
The tourist industry is largely dependent on skiing in winter. In summer the Alpine scenery and many outdoor activities attract visitors from across Europe(sailing, hiking, climbing and aerial sports such as gliding). The Tour de France passes through the department regularly. This draws many cycling fanatics to cycle the cols and watch the race.

</doc>
<doc id="83191" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83191" title="Amphinomus">
Amphinomus

In Greek mythology, Amphinomus, also Amphínomos (Ἀμφίνομος; literally "grazing all about"), was the son of King Nisos and one of the suitors of Penelope that was killed by Telemachus. Amphinomus was considered the best-behaved of the suitors. Despite Odysseus's warning, he was compelled by Athena to stay, as he had been a suitor nonetheless. He was killed by a spear thrown by Telemachus during the murder of the suitors; ironically, Amphinomous had twice tried to dissuade the suitors from killing Telemachus. Amphinomus had been Penelope's favorite suitor and he was the most likely to marry her.

</doc>
<doc id="83192" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83192" title="Amyntor">
Amyntor

Amyntor (), was an ancient Greek name attributed to several people both mythological and historical.

</doc>
<doc id="83193" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83193" title="Drawbridge mentality">
Drawbridge mentality

A drawbridge mentality is the attitude of people who have migrated to a more exclusive or more "unspoilt" community and then campaign to preserve the tranquility of that community by opposing further inward migration by people or businesses and, possibly, any development or refurbishment, including plans put forward by those already located there.
The term can imply a selfish attitude and can be taken as an insult by people who have strong affection for their home locality and wish to protect it from any changes. It is closely related to the NIMBY attitude.
A drawbridge was historically the hinged bridge at a castle's gates providing entry across a defensive moat. Raising the drawbridge to a vertical position was therefore one means by which intruders could be shut out of the castle.

</doc>
<doc id="83194" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83194" title="Antenor">
Antenor

__NOTOC__
Antenor (, "Antḗnōr";  ) was an Athenian sculptor. He is recorded as the creator of the joint statues of the tyrannicides Harmodius and Aristogeiton funded by the Athenians on the expulsion of Hippias. These statues were carried away to Susa by Xerxes I of Persia during the Greco-Persian Wars. Archaeologists have also established that a basis signed by "Antenor son of Eumares" belonged to a set of female figures in an archaic style which were displayed in the acropolis. The sculptor of the "Harmodius and Aristogeiton" is usually listed as the son of Euphranor.

</doc>
<doc id="83195" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83195" title="Theano">
Theano

Theano (; ) was the priestess of Athena in Troy. 
Life.
Theano was the daughter of the Thracian king Cisseus and Telecleia, wife of Antenor, and mother of many sons and a daughter Crino. The household of Antenor and Theano advocated peace and advised Helen's return to the Greeks. Because of their support (some say treason), the Greeks spared their household when they sacked the city. One story has Theano and Antenor sailing with Aeneas to Italy and founding the city of Padua. Another story is that she took the Palladium, an image of Athena that had fallen from the sky and supposedly provided Troy its protection, with her. In Book VI of the Iliad, with Hecuba and the Trojan women, Theano offered a gift and plea to Athena for the life of the city, but was rebuffed.
Other uses.
Theano is also the name of three more (minor) figures in Greek and Roman mythology.

</doc>
<doc id="83199" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83199" title="Anticlea">
Anticlea

In Greek mythology, Anticlea (, literally "without fame") was the daughter of Autolycus and Amphithea and mother of Odysseus by Laërtes (though some say by Sisyphus). She was also the granddaughter of the trickster god Hermes (who was the father of her father).
Anticlea in the "Odyssey".
In Book XI of the "Odyssey", Odysseus makes a trip to the underworld to seek the advice of the dead prophet Tiresias. In the underworld, he encounters many spirits, including that of his mother, Anticlea. Initially, he rebuffs her since he is waiting for the prophet to approach.
After speaking with Tiresias, however, Odysseus allows his mother to come near and lets her speak. She asks him why he is in the underworld while alive, and he tells her about his various troubles and failed attempts to get home. Then he asks her how she died and inquires about his family at home. She tells him that she died of grief, longing for him while he was at war. Anticlea also says that Laërtes (Odysseus' father) "grieves continually" for Odysseus and lives in a hovel in the countryside, clad in rags and sleeping on the floor. Anticlea further describes the condition of Odysseus' wife Penelope and son Telemachus.
Penelope has not yet remarried but is overwhelmed with sadness and longing for her husband while Telemachus acts as magistrate for Odysseus' properties. Odysseus attempts to embrace his mother three times but discovers that she is incorporeal, and his arms simply pass through her. She explains that this is how all ghosts are, and he expresses great sorrow.
Anticlea and Sisyphus.
According to some later sources, including a fragment of Aeschylus' lost tragedy "The Judgment of Arms", Odysseus was the child of Anticlea by Sisyphus, not Laërtes. In this version of the story, Autolycus, an infamous trickster, stole Sisyphus' cattle. At some point, Sisyphus recognized his cattle while on a visit to Autolycus and subsequently seduced (or, in some versions, raped) Anticlea, Autolycus' daughter. Odysseus was the result of this union, which took place before Anticlea's marriage to Laërtes..

</doc>
<doc id="83200" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83200" title="Autolycus">
Autolycus

In Greek mythology, Autolycus (; "Autolykos", "The Wolf Itself", or "very wolf" ) was a son of the Olympian god Hermes and Chione. He was the husband of Neaera, or according to Homer, of Amphithea. Autolycus fathered Anticlea (who married Laertes of Ithaca, hence the grandfather of Odysseus) and several sons, of whom only Aesimus is named.
Life and major events.
There are a number of different accounts of the birth of Autolycus. According to most, he was the son of Hermes and Chione or Philonis. In Ovid's version, Autolycus was conceived after Hermes had intercourse with the virgin Chione ("Ovid" "11"). Pausanias instead states that Autolycus' real father was Daedalion ("Pausanias 8. 4. 6".).
Autolycus was husband to Mestra, daughter of Erysichthon ("Ovid 8. 738") (who could change her shape at will), or to Neaera ("Pausanias" 8. 4. 3), or to Amphithea ("Homer", "Odyssey", 19. 394). He became the father of Anticlea and Polymede, of whom the latter was the mother of Jason, the famous Argonaut who led a group of men to find the coveted Golden Fleece ("Apollodorus" 1.9.16). A different Autolycus, the son of Deimachus, was a part of the Argonauts who went on the journey to find the fleece.
Through Anticleia, Autolycus was also the grandfather of the famous warrior Odysseus, and he was responsible for the naming of the child as well. This happened when the nurse of the child Eurycleia "laid the child upon his knees and spoke, and addressed him: Autolycus, find now thyself a name to give to thy child's own child; be sure he has long been prayed for". Then Autolycus answered: "Since I have been angered (ὀδυσσάμενος "odyssamenos" 
) with many, both men and women, let the name of the child be Odysseus".
Autolycus obtained most of the same skills that his supposed father Hermes possesses, such as the art of theft, trickery ("Hyginus" 201), and skill with the lyre and gracious song ("Ovid" 11. 301). It was said that he "loved to make white of black, and black of white, from a hornless animal to a horned one, or from horned one to a hornless" ("Hyginus" 201). He was given the gift that his thievery could not be caught by anyone ("Hyginus" 201).
He put his skills to the test when he stole the helmet of the great warrior and his grandson, Odysseus, "he had broken into the stout-built house of Amyntor, son of Ormenus; and he gave it to Amphidamas of Cythera to take to Scandeia, and Amphidamas gave it to Molus as a guest-gift, but he gave it to his own son Meriones to wear; and now, being set thereon, it covered the head of Odysseus" ("Homer" 10.254 I). He had a helmet to make him invisible. Autolycus, master of thievery, was also well known for stealing Sisyphus' herd right from underneath him. Sisyphus, who was commonly known for being a crafty king that killed guests, seduced his niece and stole his brothers' throne ("Hyginus" 50-99) and was banished to the throes of Tartarus by the gods.
Heracles, the great Greek hero, was taught the art of wrestling by Autolycus ("Apollodorus" 2.4.9). However, Autolycus was a source of some controversy in Heracles' life, because Autolycus stole some cattle from Euboea and Eurytus, who accused Heracles of the deed and, upon his going mad about these accusations, Heracles killed them plus another one of Autolycus' sons, Iphitus. This led to Heracles serving three years of punishment for the deed to repent for this ("Apollodorus" 2.6.3).
Cultural references.
Although not as well known as many other Greek mythological figures, Autolycus has appeared in a number of works of fiction.

</doc>
<doc id="83201" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83201" title="Philammon">
Philammon

In Greek mythology, Philammon was the son of Chione and Apollo. Some say his mother was Leuconoe, daughter of Eosphoros, or Philonis, daughter of either Deion or of Eosphoros and Cleoboea. He was an excellent musician, a talent he received from his father. By Argiope, a nymph of Mount Parnassos, he had two children, Eumolpus and Thamyris.
Philammon was said to have established the tradition of the hymns celebrating the births of Leto, Artemis and Apollo, written by himself, being performed by choruses of girls at Delphi. He was the second winner of the most ancient singing contest at Delphi, after Chrysothemis and before his son Thamyris. Some ascribe to him the foundation of the Lernaean mysteries. He was also reported to have been among the Argonauts.

</doc>
<doc id="83203" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83203" title="Antiphates">
Antiphates

In Greek mythology, Antiphates (; Ancient Greek: Ἀντιφάτης) is the name of five characters.

</doc>
<doc id="83204" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83204" title="Antiphus">
Antiphus

In Greek mythology, Antiphus or Ántiphos (Ἄντιφος) is a name attributed to multiple individuals:
The name Antiphus is not to be confused with Antiphōs (Ἀντίφως), which refers to a soldier in the army of the Seven Against Thebes who killed Chromis but was himself killed by Hypseus.

</doc>
<doc id="83205" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83205" title="Ardennes (department)">
Ardennes (department)

Ardennes () is a department in the Alsace-Champagne-Ardenne-Lorraine region of northeastern France named after the Ardennes area. Its prefecture is the town Charleville-Mézières. The inhabitants of the department are known as "Ardennais" or "Ardennaises".
Geography.
Summary.
The department is surrounded by the French departments of Aisne to the west, Marne to the south, Meuse to the east and by the Belgian province of Namur to the north.
It is traversed in its northern part by the winding valley of the Meuse and it is in this part of the department that the majority of people and activities are focused. Charleville-Mézières and Sedan are the main urban centres.
The department is part of the Academy of Reims and under the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal of Reims. The INSEE and Post Code is 08.
General geographic data.
With an area of , the Ardennes was the smallest of the four departments that made up the region Champagne-Ardenne. It nevertheless presents a degree of geographical diversity.
Ardennes owes its name to a vast natural area, the Ardennes, a plateau deeply cut by the Meuse and its many tributaries which extend above the Walloon part of southern Belgium as well as Luxembourg, Germany (Eifel), and the north of the neighbouring department of Meuse.
The highest point of the department is 504m and is situated on the southern slopes of the Croix Scaille (located between the French commune of Les Hautes-Rivières and the Belgian commune of Gedinne).
It is in this part of the Ardennes mountains that the Meuse winds through a picturesque valley, known locally as "the valley". Flowing into the northern part of the Ardennes department it waters both upstream and downstream the main cities of Sedan, Charleville-Mézières, and Nouzonville. It has numerous tributaries – the main ones in the department being the Semois and the Chiers.
In the south of the department where the Aisne flows lies the vast treeless plain of Champagne chalk (formerly called flea-ridden Champagne) extended to the south-west by the small grain-growing region of Porcien, while Thiérache in the west and Argonne in the east are fringe grasslands with very highly individualized soils.
Climatology.
The Ardennes department does not have a uniform climate throughout its territory especially not during the winter period.
In the north of the department near the department of Aisne and the border with Belgium to the centre of the department near the Canton of Omont and in the south of the valley of the Meuse, the climate is considered "degraded continental" (heavy rainfall in autumn and frequent frosts in winter), while the rest of the department has a "degraded oceanic" or "temperate continental" climate (relative to an oceanic climate, the winters are colder and the summers are hotter, rainfall in the lowlands is lower and winds are of lower strength). All this stems from the location of the department which is mid-way between the English Channel, the North Sea and the interior of Europe.
This difference can be easily observed in practice. Winter is more rigorous and there is a higher risk of snow at Rocroi, Givet, and Sedan – all cities in the north of the department where the common characteristics of the degraded continental climate prevail.
This nuance of climate is also evident by the temperature difference with the adjoining regions. The Nord-Pas-de-Calais and the Parisian Basin benefit from the maritime influences of the English Channel, the Pas de Calais, and the North Sea as well as the geophysical conditions in the presence of relatively flat terrain.
This climatic difference is particularly pronounced in the presence of frost especially in the valleys of the Meuse, Semoy, the plateau of Rocroi, and around the Croix-Scaille where it can be very marked and has the disadvantage of persisting longer in the year with a significant influence on the vegetation.
Demography.
The evolution and distribution of the population.
Despite a high birth rate (the highest rate in France in 1968), the department continues to lose population: 300,000 in 2000 due to high unemployment (hence "migration" continues). The two world wars have each time resulted in a loss of population (such as the "exodus" of 1940). There were 330,000 people at the end of the 19th century.
That the major urban areas of the department are the most affected is characterized by a stagnation of the population – a population decline of up to 2% compared to 1999 in the city centres and suburbs (Charleville-Mézières, Revin, Fumay, Givet, Rethel).
The communes, however, are gaining inhabitants (the phenomenon of urban sprawl). This is explained by the search for better living in the countryside which matches the desire of many people to build a small land-holding, typically a house with land to the detriment of their proximity to their workplace. This highly contemporary concept favours commuting between Home and Work. This is the phenomenon of suburbanization which has become common in the whole of France from which Ardennes does not escape.
On 1 January 2006, the Ardennes population stood at 295,653 inhabitants. The population is declining in urban areas but five times less than in rural areas. The limited decline in the urban space where two thirds of the Ardennes people live is the result of two opposite dynamics. Semi-urban communes have gained 0.5% of inhabitants per year over the period 1999–2006 at the expense of urban centres (downtown and suburbs) which lost 0.6% per year. For thirty years the population has lagged in the main cities of Ardennes. Between 1999 and 2006, the annual decline was 0.2% for Sedan and Rethel, 1.8% for Revin, and 1% for Charleville-Mézières. The most unfavourable rural population change came from degradation of rural employment centres, such as Fumay or Vouziers and to a lesser extent that of their periphery. This was slightly mitigated by a small increase in population in other rural communes.
List of cities.
Population of the Main towns of Ardennes in 2009
History.
Etymology.
The name of the department is related to the toponym "Ardenne" which could derive from the Gallic "ardu" meaning "high". It would have been transformed into "Arduenna" by the Romans to designate the ancient Ardennes forest and the mountains mentioned by Julius Caesar in the work attributed to him: "Commentaries on the Gallic War". "Arduenna Sylva" was used for the pine forest on the plateau of Bastogne. It was then transformed into "Ardenna" in the 6th century.
This toponym is absent from the names of communes in the department of Ardennes while those of Argonne (Beaumont-en-Argonne), Porcien (Château-Porcien, Novion-Porcien, Chaumont-Porcien, and even Champagne (Vaux-Champagne) are sometimes fused and all have a connotation of regional belonging. This is why the name of "Ardenne" is not specific to the department as it is found in many other parts of France – for example in western and central-western France, Belgium, and Luxembourg where it has its usual sense – from Celtic origin – of "high", "high woods" or "forest".
History of the Ardennes department.
The department is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 under the Act of 22 December 1789. It includes part of the former provinces of Champagne and Argonne, several principalities including those of Arches and Sedan, countships (such as Rethel), and different areas returned to France (from the former Spanish Netherlands) in the 18th century.
On 12 May 1793 the department expanded itself with the Bailiwick of Liège, Couvin, and the countships from the Holy Roman Empire of Fagnolle and on 26 October 1795 a part of the Duchy of Bouillon.
After the victory of the allies in the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815, the second Treaty of Paris subtracted territory from Ardennes to attach to the Netherlands: Duchy of Bouillon, Couvin, Mariembourg, Fagnolle, and Philippeville. In addition, the department was occupied by Prussian troops from June 1815 to November 1818.
On 2 September 1870 Sedan was the place of surrender for Napoleon III at the Battle of Sedan against the troops of the Prussian states, a coalition commanded by Helmut von Moltke. The King of Prussia Wilhelm I, the future emperor of the Second Reich under the same name and Bismarck viewed the battle from the hills overlooking Sedan. The defeat marked the end of the Second Empire, and at the same time the birth of the French Third Republic on 4 September 1870.
During the two world wars for strategic reasons the region each time became the passage for the invading armies because of the narrow width of the Meuse and its deep valley. The French military believed that the region was defended by its terrain and thick forests present in the northern of the department and so neglected the defence of the territory. During the First World War the Battle of the Ardennes was fought in the department and Charleville-Mézières became the headquarters of the German Crown Prince. It was at Vouziers and other places that the Czechoslovak legions fought with the man who would become the first president of the Czechoslovak republic, Jan Masaryk, and it was also near the same city that the aeroplane of Roland Garros was shot down.
It was the only French department have been fully occupied during that conflict except for northern Lorraine (Moselle) and Alsace which had been under German administration since 1871.
During the Second World War the main effort of the German army was again focused on this area, especially on the right bank of the River Meuse, symbolized by the breakthrough at Sedan which would lead the French troops into the strategic trap the Yellow Plan designed by General von Manstein and approved by Hitler.
It is in this department that the Maginot Line ended: the last fort of the line (Fort Villy la Ferte) was located about five kilometres from Carignan. The French General staff did not want to continue the line of defence along the border with Belgium, a neutral and friendly country. Furthermore, they hoped that the unique geography and the forest would stop the German army.
After the armistice of 1940 Ardennes was declared a "forbidden zone" (actually a German settlement area) throughout the occupation by the Nazi army.
In 1944 the "Battle of the Bulge" was fought partly in this department.
Administration.
Administrative organization.
The seat of the prefecture of the department is at Charleville-Mézières and the three sub-prefectures are Rethel, Sedan, and Vouziers. Rocroi was also a sub-prefecture until 1926. In addition, the departmental seat of the "General Council of Ardennes" is located at Charleville-Mézières.
Territorial organization.
The Ardennes is composed of 457 communes which are grouped into 19 cantons and four arrondissements of varying sizes.
The largest arrondissement of the department is that of Charleville-Mézières while the smallest is Sedan which is twice as wide. The two arrondissements that occupy the northern part of the Ardennes, however, have four fifths of the departmental population.
The other two arrondissements, Rethel and Vouziers, occupy the southern part of the department with roughly comparable areas but are very sparsely populated.
Before the Poincaré decree of 10 September 1926 which removed many sub-prefectures in France, the department had five arrondissements. In addition to the four mentioned above, the fifth was that of Rocroi – a small historic city in the north-west of the department close to Belgium – which has been since annexed in its entirety to the district of Charleville-Mézières. The former arrondissement of Rocroi then consisted of six cantons – including four on the border with Belgium – which were Givet, Fumay, Revin, Rocroi, Rumigny, and Signy-le-Petit.
Under the intercommunality framework, Ardennes consists of an urban community organized around the city préfecture, called "Heart of Ardennes" and has fifteen communities of communes including in Sedan the "Communauté de communes du Pays sedanais" which is the most important.
In addition, the Ardennes has 33 communes that do not adhere to any Intercommunal cooperative organisation (EPCI).
Politics.
The President of the General Council is Benoît Huré of the Union for a Popular Movement.
Economy.
The economy of the department, after previously resting on agriculture (forestry and livestock – crops are poor), has been based for over a century now on industry (now in a difficult position) and the services sector, although the proportion of the Ardennes labour force working in this sector is lower than the national average. At the beginning of the 19th century, the region was the largest in France for metal working using charcoal. There was no coal found in the department (only slate from Fumay was usable) but the metallurgical industry developed there (bolts, screws, nails). The railway with many branches ("Compagnie des chemins de fer des Ardennes" from the Sellière family which merged with the Compagnie de l'Est) accelerated the industrialization at the end of the 19th century in Charleville, Sedan (which had its trams), and Revin. The newspaper "L'Usine ardennaise" (The Ardennes Machine) became "L'Usine nouvelle" (The New Machine). The crisis in the 1970s precipitated the decline of metallurgical activity in the department (the blast furnace and small workshops closed one after the other: Blagny, Vireux-Molhain, Murtin-et-Bogny, etc.). Today there are still many subcontractors for the railway industry (TGV for example) and the car industry (GMC, PSA Peugeot Citroën, Mercedes-Benz, among others), Hermès has recently installed themselves at Murtin-et-Bogny, PSA Peugeot Citroën is installed at Les Ayvelles. There is also a nuclear site – the Chooz Nuclear Power Plant with several reactors including the first pressurized water reactor (REP) in France. Agriculture has grown considerably using industrial techniques (wheat, corn, sugar beet).
There are direct TGV trains from the Gare de l'Est in Paris to Charleville-Mézières (1h 35m), Sedan, and several TGV trains to Reims with a change for Charleville-Mézières.
A "Y" road has also been set up with the A4 Reims-Paris, the A34 (freeway), and the links to Lille and Brussels which need to take the N5 to join the motorway ring of Charleroi. Similarly, the junction with the highway leading to Luxembourg and Cologne needs to use a portion of highway in France. Improved means of land communication (TGV and A34 motorway) provides the benefit of relative proximity to Paris, Reims, Metz and Belgian cities such as Liège, Charleroi and Brussels.
Every year in September, the Sedan fair is a big shopping event (2nd in the region) which attracts about 250,000 people each year.
Tourism.
General Information.
In the department there are iconic landmarks such as the "Château de Sedan" (the busiest Ardennes pay site with an average of 60,000 admissions per year), the fortified site of Charlemont at Givet, the fort at Les Ayvelles, and the fortress of Rocroi attract many visitors each year. There are also many fortified churches and medieval sites in the department. There is the Ardennes forest, the "Green Way" (a bicycle path connecting Montcy-Notre Dame near Charleville-Mézières to Givet along the Meuse valley) promoting weekend tourism and tourist routes (green tourism).
Cultural tourism is booming with many music festivals (Le Cabaret Vert, the Douzy'k festival, the Aymon Folk Festival) not to mention museums (Museum of the Ardennes etc.) and castles (Castle of Sedan) and the growing interest in industrial heritage which is of more and more value.
Finally, the creation of the Natural Regional Park of Ardennes (Regional Natural Park of Ardennes on 21 December 2011, should continue to promote this type of tourism which is increasingly sought.
Second homes.
Home purchases by Belgians and Dutch people are common in the region because the prices are much lower than in their country of residence. However, according to the census of the general population of 1 January 2008, 3.7% of available housing in the department are second homes which is rather low.
Culture.
Festivals.
For more than 40 years (the first time in 1961 at the initiative of Jacques Félix) there has been in Charleville-Mézières the "World Festival of Puppet Theatre" (now every three years). At the last festival in 2009 more than 200,000 people were present. In the same city there is also a school: the International Institute of Puppetry. The "Rock Festival and Territory Le Cabaret Vert" had more than 50,000 festival-goers at the seventh festival in 2011 and this takes place every year in Charleville-Mézières making it the 7th largest festival in France by attendance. The festival "The Poetic Otherworld" organizes events in October in some Ardennes communes.
At Sedan the medieval festival is held every year around the Castle of Sedan, the largest castle in Europe. This is an event that brings together more than 30,000 spectators.
At Rethel there are the famous festivals of Saint Anne which have been held for over 200 years.
At Bogny-sur-Meuse there is the "Aymon Folk Festival" which brings together nearly 10,000 people.
The Ardennes also has other well-known festivals such as the "Festimeuse" which attracts 10,000 people, the festival of "Cassine" with 7,000 people at the 3rd festival in 2010.
The metal festival of Vouziers attractes about 2000 people. The Rock festival in El Mont at Aiglemont hosted more than 2,000 people in 2010. Lastly there is at Douzy every July and every second year the Douzy'k Festival which brings between 5,000 and 7,000 people each time.
The Argonne does not have only two musical events. For 14 years, the village of Louvergny has staged a lyrical festival called "Encounters of Louvergny" in early August as the heart of the Argonne campaign, with singers from different countries. More recently "Notes of Argonne" propose to cross the Argonne mountains with copncerts of classical music with regional and national performers. The May 2008 festival included Patrice Fontanarosa and Marielle Nordmann. Both events had an immediate success in the region and the public has not stopped coming since.
The Ardennes in tales and legends.
For a long time the region was a land of legends with its rocks, rivers, lakes, and thick dark forests: for example The Four Sons of Aymon, knights on their horse called Bayard helped by the enchanter Maugis who gave his name to village of Noyers-Pont-Maugis at the time of Charlemagne.
The Ardennes in literature.
The novel by Yves Gibeau, "Les gros sous" (The big money) (1953) takes place in the south-west of the department.
The Ardennes serves as the backdrop to the novel by Julien Gracq, "A Balcony in the Forest" ("Un balcon en forêt"), published in 1958 and for which Michel Mitrani made a film in 1979 with Jacques Villeret. This novel/story is based on the experience as a soldier by the author at the beginning of the Second World War.
The region serves as a backdrop for the Ardennes writer André Dhôtel (1900-1991), especially in "Le Pays où l'on n’arrive jamais" (The country where one never arrives).
The Ardennes in cinema.
The department has a varied natural environment (the Meuse valley, the border between Belgium and France, the Ardennes plateau, forests, etc.) which attracts filmmakers and television which first began in the late 1960s and in the 1970s.
Notable people linked to the Department.
The local press in Ardennes.
Regional newspapers are: "L'Ardennais" (from Charleville-Mézières) and "L'Union", they now have shared writing – only the first page differs. Since 2009, a weekly newspaper has been published in the Ardennes: "La Semaine des Ardennes". Printed in Charleville-Mézières over 2000 copies are printed.

</doc>
<doc id="83206" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83206" title="Antor">
Antor

In Greek mythology, "Antor" was a companion of Heracles. When Heracles visited Evander, Antor stayed behind in Italy.
See Virgil X, 779.
No more is known about him.

</doc>
<doc id="83207" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=83207" title="Evander of Pallene">
Evander of Pallene

In Roman mythology, Evander (from Greek Εὔανδρος Euandros, "good man" or "strong man": an etymology used by poets to emphasize the hero's virtue) was a culture hero from Arcadia, Greece, who brought the Greek pantheon, laws and alphabet to Italy, where he founded the city of Pallantium on the future site of Rome, sixty years before the Trojan War. He instituted the festival of the Lupercalia. Evander was deified after his death and an altar was constructed to him on the Aventine Hill.
Geneaology.
Evander was born to Mercury and Carmenta, and his wisdom was beyond that of all Arcadians. His son Pallas apparently died childless; however, the "gens" Fabia claimed descent from Evander.
In the "Aeneid".
Evander plays a major role in Virgil's "Aeneid" Books VIII-XII. Previous to the Trojan War, Evander gathered a group of natives to a city he founded in Italy near the Tiber river, which he named Pallantium. Virgil states that he named the city in honor of his son, Pallas, although Pausanias, Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus say that Evander's birth city was Pallantium in Arcadia, after which he named the new city.
The oldest tradition of its founding ascribes to Evander the erection of the Great Altar of Hercules in the Forum Boarium. In "Aeneid", VIII, where Aeneas and his crew first come upon Evander and his people, they were venerating Hercules for dispatching the giant Cacus. Virgil's listeners would have related this scene to the same Great Altar of Hercules in the Forum Boarium of their own day, one detail among many in the Aeneid that Virgil used to link the heroic past of myth with the Age of Augustus. Also according to Virgil, Hercules was returning from Gades with Geryon's cattle when Evander entertained him. Evander then became the first to raise an altar to Hercules' heroism. This archaic altar was destroyed in the Great Fire of Rome, AD 64.
Because of their traditional ties, Evander aids Aeneas in his war against Turnus and the Rutuli: the Arcadian had known the father of Aeneas, Anchises, before the Trojan War, and shares a common ancestry through Atlas with Aeneas's family.

</doc>
